
1.1 Observations of climate change
Since the TAR, progress in understanding how climate is changing in space and time has been gained through improvements and
extensions of numerous datasets and data analyses, broader geographical coverage, better understanding of uncertainties and a wider
variety of measurements. {WGI SPM}
Definitions of climate change
Climate change in IPCC usage refers to a change in the state
of the climate that can be identified (e.g. using statistical tests)
by changes in the mean and/or the variability of its properties,
and that persists for an extended period, typically decades or
longer. It refers to any change in climate over time, whether
due to natural variability or as a result of human activity. This
usage differs from that in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), where climate change
refers to a change of climate that is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global
atmosphere and that is in addition to natural climate variability
observed over comparable time periods.
Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now
evident from observations of increases in global average
air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow
and ice and rising global average sea level (Figure 1.1). {WGI
3.2, 4.8, 5.2, 5.5, SPM}
Eleven of the last twelve years (1995-2006) rank among the
twelve warmest years in the instrumental record of global surface
temperature (since 1850). The 100-year linear trend (1906-2005)
of 0.74 [0.56 to 0.92]°C is larger than the corresponding trend of
0.6 [0.4 to 0.8]°C (1901-2000) given in the TAR (Figure 1.1). The
linear warming trend over the 50 years from 1956 to 2005 (0.13
[0.10 to 0.16]°C per decade) is nearly twice that for the 100 years
from 1906 to 2005. {WGI 3.2, SPM}
The temperature increase is widespread over the globe and is
greater at higher northern latitudes (Figure 1.2). Average Arctic temperatures have increased at almost twice the global average rate in
the past 100 years. Land regions have warmed faster than the oceans
(Figures 1.2 and 2.5). Observations since 1961 show that the average temperature of the global ocean has increased to depths of at
least 3000m and that the ocean has been taking up over 80% of the
heat being added to the climate system. New analyses of balloonborne and satellite measurements of lower- and mid-tropospheric
temperature show warming rates similar to those observed in surface temperature. {WGI 3.2, 3.4, 5.2, SPM}
Increases in sea level are consistent with warming (Figure 1.1).
Global average sea level rose at an average rate of 1.8 [1.3 to 2.3]mm
per year over 1961 to 2003 and at an average rate of about 3.1 [2.4
to 3.8]mm per year from 1993 to 2003. Whether this faster rate for
1993 to 2003 reflects decadal variation or an increase in the longerterm trend is unclear. Since 1993 thermal expansion of the oceans
has contributed about 57% of the sum of the estimated individual
contributions to the sea level rise, with decreases in glaciers and
ice caps contributing about 28% and losses from the polar ice sheets
contributing the remainder. From 1993 to 2003 the sum of these
climate contributions is consistent within uncertainties with the total
sea level rise that is directly observed. {WGI 4.6, 4.8, 5.5, SPM, Table
SPM.1}
Observed decreases in snow and ice extent are also consistent
with warming (Figure 1.1). Satellite data since 1978 show that annual average Arctic sea ice extent has shrunk by 2.7 [2.1 to 3.3]%
per decade, with larger decreases in summer of 7.4 [5.0 to 9.8]%
per decade. Mountain glaciers and snow cover on average have
declined in both hemispheres. The maximum areal extent of seasonally frozen ground has decreased by about 7% in the Northern
Hemisphere since 1900, with decreases in spring of up to 15%.
Temperatures at the top of the permafrost layer have generally increased since the 1980s in the Arctic by up to 3°C. {WGI 3.2, 4.5, 4.6,
4.7, 4.8, 5.5, SPM}
At continental, regional and ocean basin scales, numerous longterm changes in other aspects of climate have also been observed.
Trends from 1900 to 2005 have been observed in precipitation
amount in many large regions. Over this period, precipitation increased significantly in eastern parts of North and South America,
northern Europe and northern and central Asia whereas precipitation declined in the Sahel, the Mediterranean, southern Africa and
parts of southern Asia. Globally, the area affected by drought has
likely2 increased since the 1970s. {WGI 3.3, 3.9, SPM}
Some extreme weather events have changed in frequency and/
or intensity over the last 50 years:
 It is very likely that cold days, cold nights and frosts have become less frequent over most land areas, while hot days and
hot nights have become more frequent. {WGI 3.8, SPM}
 It is likely that heat waves have become more frequent over
most land areas. {WGI 3.8, SPM}
 It is likely that the frequency of heavy precipitation events (or
proportion of total rainfall from heavy falls) has increased over
most areas. {WGI 3.8, 3.9, SPM}
 It is likely that the incidence of extreme high sea level3 has
increased at a broad range of sites worldwide since 1975. {WGI
5.5, SPM}
There is observational evidence of an increase in intense tropical
cyclone activity in the North Atlantic since about 1970, and suggestions of increased intense tropical cyclone activity in some other regions where concerns over data quality are greater. Multi-decadal variability and the quality of the tropical cyclone records prior to routine
satellite observations in about 1970 complicate the detection of longterm trends in tropical cyclone activity. {WGI 3.8, SPM}
Average Northern Hemisphere temperatures during the second
half of the 20th century were very likely higher than during any other
50-year period in the last 500 years and likely the highest in at least
the past 1300 years. {WGI 6.6, SPM}


1.2 Observed effects of climate changes
The statements presented here are based largely on data sets
that cover the period since 1970. The number of studies of observed
trends in the physical and biological environment and their relationship to regional climate changes has increased greatly since the
TAR. The quality of the data sets has also improved. There is a
notable lack of geographic balance in data and literature on observed changes, with marked scarcity in developing countries.
{WGII SPM}
These studies have allowed a broader and more confident assessment of the relationship between observed warming and impacts than was made in the TAR. That assessment concluded that
“there is high confidence2
 that recent regional changes in temperature have had discernible impacts on physical and biological systems”. {WGII SPM}
Observational evidence from all continents and most oceans
shows that many natural systems are being affected by regional climate changes, particularly temperature increases.
{WGII SPM}
There is high confidence that natural systems related to snow, ice
and frozen ground (including permafrost) are affected. Examples are:
 enlargement and increased numbers of glacial lakes {WGII 1.3, SPM}
 increasing ground instability in permafrost regions and rock
avalanches in mountain regions {WGII 1.3, SPM}
 changes in some Arctic and Antarctic ecosystems, including
those in sea-ice biomes, and predators at high levels of the food
web. {WGII 1.3, 4.4, 15.4, SPM}
Based on growing evidence, there is high confidence that the
following effects on hydrological systems are occurring: increased
runoff and earlier spring peak discharge in many glacier- and snowfed rivers, and warming of lakes and rivers in many regions, with
effects on thermal structure and water quality. {WGII 1.3, 15.2, SPM}
There is very high confidence, based on more evidence from a
wider range of species, that recent warming is strongly affecting
terrestrial biological systems, including such changes as earlier timing of spring events, such as leaf-unfolding, bird migration and
egg-laying; and poleward and upward shifts in ranges in plant and
animal species. Based on satellite observations since the early 1980s,
there is high confidence that there has been a trend in many regions
towards earlier ‘greening’ of vegetation in the spring linked to longer
thermal growing seasons due to recent warming. {WGII 1.3, 8.2, 14.2,
SPM}
There is high confidence, based on substantial new evidence,
that observed changes in marine and freshwater biological systems
are associated with rising water temperatures, as well as related
changes in ice cover, salinity, oxygen levels and circulation. These
include: shifts in ranges and changes in algal, plankton and fish
abundance in high-latitude oceans; increases in algal and zooplankton abundance in high-latitude and high-altitude lakes; and range
changes and earlier fish migrations in rivers. While there is increasing evidence of climate change impacts on coral reefs, separating
the impacts of climate-related stresses from other stresses (e.g. overfishing and pollution) is difficult. {WGII 1.3, SPM}
Other effects of regional climate changes on natural and
human environments are emerging, although many are difficult to discern due to adaptation and non-climatic drivers.
{WGII SPM}
Effects of temperature increases have been documented with
medium confidence in the following managed and human systems:
 agricultural and forestry management at Northern Hemisphere
higher latitudes, such as earlier spring planting of crops, and
alterations in disturbances of forests due to fires and pests {WGII
1.3, SPM}
 some aspects of human health, such as excess heat-related
mortality in Europe, changes in infectious disease vectors in
parts of Europe, and earlier onset of and increases in seasonal
production of allergenic pollen in Northern Hemisphere high
and mid-latitudes {WGII 1.3, 8.2, 8.ES, SPM}
 some human activities in the Arctic (e.g. hunting and shorter
Sea level rise and human development are together contributing to losses of coastal wetlands and mangroves and increasing
damage from coastal flooding in many areas. However, based on
the published literature, the impacts have not yet become established trends. {WGII 1.3, 1.ES, SPM}

1.3 Consistency of changes in physical and
biological systems with warming
Changes in the ocean and on land, including observed decreases
in snow cover and Northern Hemisphere sea ice extent, thinner sea
ice, shorter freezing seasons of lake and river ice, glacier melt, decreases in permafrost extent, increases in soil temperatures and
borehole temperature profiles, and sea level rise, provide additional
evidence that the world is warming. {WGI 3.9}
Of the more than 29,000 observational data series, from 75 studies, that show significant change in many physical and biological
systems, more than 89% are consistent with the direction of change
expected as a response to warming (Figure 1.2). {WGII 1.4, SPM}

1.4 Some aspects of climate have not been
observed to change
Some aspects of climate appear not to have changed and, for
some, data inadequacies mean that it cannot be determined if they
have changed. Antarctic sea ice extent shows inter-annual variability and localised changes but no statistically significant average
multi-decadal trend, consistent with the lack of rise in near-surface
atmospheric temperatures averaged across the continent. There is
insufficient evidence to determine whether trends exist in some other
variables, for example the meridional overturning circulation (MOC)
of the global ocean or small-scale phenomena such as tornadoes,
hail, lightning and dust storms. There is no clear trend in the annual
numbers of tropical cyclones. {WGI 3.2, 3.8, 4.4, 5.3, SPM}


2.1 Emissions of long-lived GHGs
The radiative forcing of the climate system is dominated by the
long-lived GHGs, and this section considers those whose emissions
are covered by the UNFCCC.
Global GHG emissions due to human activities have grown
since pre-industrial times, with an increase of 70% between
1970 and 2004 (Figure 2.1).5 {WGIII 1.3, SPM}
Carbon dioxide (CO2
) is the most important anthropogenic GHG.
Its annual emissions have grown between 1970 and 2004 by about
80%, from 21 to 38 gigatonnes (Gt), and represented 77% of total
anthropogenic GHG emissions in 2004 (Figure 2.1). The rate of
growth of CO2
-eq emissions was much higher during the recent
10-year period of 1995-2004 (0.92 GtCO2
-eq per year) than during
the previous period of 1970-1994 (0.43 GtCO2
-eq per year). {WGIII
1.3, TS.1, SPM}
Carbon dioxide-equivalent (CO2
-eq) emissions and
concentrations
GHGs differ in their warming influence (radiative forcing) on
the global climate system due to their different radiative properties and lifetimes in the atmosphere. These warming influences may be expressed through a common metric based on
the radiative forcing of CO2.
• CO2
-equivalent emission is the amount of CO2
 emission
that would cause the same time-integrated radiative forcing,
over a given time horizon, as an emitted amount of a longlived GHG or a mixture of GHGs. The equivalent CO2 emission is obtained by multiplying the emission of a GHG by its
Global Warming Potential (GWP) for the given time horizon.6
For a mix of GHGs it is obtained by summing the equivalent
CO2 emissions of each gas. Equivalent CO2 emission is a
standard and useful metric for comparing emissions of different GHGs but does not imply the same climate change
responses (see WGI 2.10).
• CO2-equivalent concentration is the concentration of CO2
that would cause the same amount of radiative forcing as a
given mixture of CO2
 and other forcing components.7
The largest growth in GHG emissions between 1970 and 2004
has come from energy supply, transport and industry, while residential and commercial buildings, forestry (including deforestation)
and agriculture sectors have been growing at a lower rate
e. The sectoral sources of GHGs in 2004 are considered in Figure 2.1c.
{WGIII 1.3, SPM}
The effect on global emissions of the decrease in global energy
intensity (-33%) during 1970 to 2004 has been smaller than the combined effect of global income growth (77%) and global population
growth (69%); both drivers of increasing energy-related CO2
 emissions. The long-term trend of declining CO2
 emissions per unit of energy supplied reversed after 2000. {WGIII 1.3, Figure SPM.2, SPM}
Differences in per capita income, per capita emissions and
energy intensity among countries remain significant. In 2004,
UNFCCC Annex I countries held a 20% share in world population,
produced 57% of the world’s Gross Domestic Product based on
Purchasing Power Parity (GDPPPP) and accounted for 46% of global GHG emissions (Figure 2.2). {WGIII 1.3, SPM}

2.2 Drivers of climate change
Changes in the atmospheric concentrations of GHGs and aerosols, land cover and solar radiation alter the energy balance of the
climate system and are drivers of climate change. They affect the
absorption, scattering and emission of radiation within the atmosphere and at the Earth’s surface. The resulting positive or negative
changes in energy balance due to these factors are expressed as
radiative forcing4
, which is used to compare warming or cooling
influences on global climate. {WGI TS.2}
Human activities result in emissions of four long-lived GHGs:
CO2
, methane (CH4
), nitrous oxide (N2
O) and halocarbons (a group
of gases containing fluorine, chlorine or bromine). Atmospheric
concentrations of GHGs increase when emissions are larger than
removal processes.
Global atmospheric concentrations of CO2
, CH4
 and N2
O
have increased markedly as a result of human activities
since 1750 and now far exceed pre-industrial values determined from ice cores spanning many thousands of years
(Figure 2.3). The atmospheric concentrations of CO2
 and CH4
in 2005 exceed by far the natural range over the last 650,000
years. Global increases in CO2
 concentrations are due primarily to fossil fuel use, with land-use change providing
another significant but smaller contribution. It is very likely
that the observed increase in CH4
 concentration is predominantly due to agriculture and fossil fuel use. The increase
in N2
O concentration is primarily due to agriculture. {WGI
2.3, 7.3, SPM}
The global atmospheric concentration of CO2
 increased from a
pre-industrial value of about 280ppm to 379ppm in 2005. The annual CO2
 concentration growth rate was larger during the last 10
years (1995-2005 average: 1.9ppm per year) than it has been since
the beginning of continuous direct atmospheric measurements
(1960-2005 average: 1.4ppm per year), although there is year-toyear variability in growth rates. {WGI 2.3, 7.3, SPM; WGIII 1.3}
The global atmospheric concentration of CH4
 has increased from
a pre-industrial value of about 715ppb to 1732ppb in the early 1990s,
and was 1774ppb in 2005. Growth rates have declined since the
early 1990s, consistent with total emissions (sum of anthropogenic
and natural sources) being nearly constant during this period. {WGI
2.3, 7.4, SPM}
The global atmospheric N2
O concentration increased from a
pre-industrial value of about 270ppb to 319ppb in 2005. {WGI 2.3,
7.4, SPM}
Many halocarbons (including hydrofluorocarbons) have increased from a near-zero pre-industrial background concentration,
primarily due to human activities. {WGI 2.3, SPM; SROC SPM}
There is very high confidence that the global average net
effect of human activities since 1750 has been one of warming, with a radiative forcing of +1.6 [+0.6 to +2.4] W/m2
(Figure 2.4). {WGI 2.3, 6.5, 2.9, SPM}
The combined radiative forcing due to increases in CO2
, CH4
and N2
O is +2.3 [+2.1 to +2.5] W/m2
, and its rate of increase during the industrial era is very likely to have been unprecedented in more
than 10,000 years (Figures 2.3 and 2.4). The CO2
 radiative forcing
increased by 20% from 1995 to 2005, the largest change for any
decade in at least the last 200 years. {WGI 2.3, 6.4, SPM}
Anthropogenic contributions to aerosols (primarily sulphate,
organic carbon, black carbon, nitrate and dust) together produce a
cooling effect, with a total direct radiative forcing of -0.5 [-0.9 to
-0.1] W/m2
 and an indirect cloud albedo forcing of -0.7 [-1.8 to
-0.3] W/m2
. Aerosols also influence precipitation. {WGI 2.4, 2.9, 7.5,
SPM}
In comparison, changes in solar irradiance since 1750 are estimated to have caused a small radiative forcing of +0.12 [+0.06 to
+0.30] W/m2
, which is less than half the estimate given in the TAR.
{WGI 2.7, SPM}



2.3 Climate sensitivity and feedbacks
The equilibrium climate sensitivity is a measure of the climate
system response to sustained radiative forcing. It is defined as the
equilibrium global average surface warming following a doubling
of CO2
 concentration. Progress since the TAR enables an assessment that climate sensitivity is likely to be in the range of 2 to 4.5°C
with a best estimate of about 3°C, and is very unlikely to be less
than 1.5°C. Values substantially higher than 4.5°C cannot be excluded, but agreement of models with observations is not as good
for those values. {WGI 8.6, 9.6, Box 10.2, SPM}
Feedbacks can amplify or dampen the response to a given forcing. Direct emission of water vapour (a greenhouse gas) by human
activities makes a negligible contribution to radiative forcing. However, as global average temperature increases, tropospheric water
vapour concentrations increase and this represents a key positive
feedback but not a forcing of climate change. Water vapour changes
represent the largest feedback affecting equilibrium climate sensitivity and are now better understood than in the TAR. Cloud feedbacks remain the largest source of uncertainty. Spatial patterns of
climate response are largely controlled by climate processes and
feedbacks. For example, sea-ice albedo feedbacks tend to enhance
the high latitude response. {WGI 2.8, 8.6, 9.2, TS.2.1.3, TS.2.5, SPM}
Warming reduces terrestrial and ocean uptake of atmospheric
CO2
, increasing the fraction of anthropogenic emissions remaining
in the atmosphere. This positive carbon cycle feedback leads to
larger atmospheric CO2
 increases and greater climate change for a
given emissions scenario, but the strength of this feedback effect
varies markedly among models. {WGI 7.3, TS.5.4, SPM; WGII 4.4}


2.4 Attribution of climate change
Attribution evaluates whether observed changes are quantitatively consistent with the expected response to external forcings
(e.g. changes in solar irradiance or anthropogenic GHGs) and inconsistent with alternative physically plausible explanations. {WGI
TS.4, SPM}Most of the observed increase in global average temperatures since the mid-20th century is very likely due to the
observed increase in anthropogenic GHG concentrations.8
This is an advance since the TAR’s conclusion that “most
of the observed warming over the last 50 years is likely to
have been due to the increase in GHG concentrations” (Figure 2.5). {WGI 9.4, SPM}
The observed widespread warming of the atmosphere and ocean,
together with ice mass loss, support the conclusion that it is extremely unlikely that global climate change of the past 50 years can
be explained without external forcing and very likely that it is not
due to known natural causes alone. During this period, the sum of
solar and volcanic forcings would likely have produced cooling,
not warming. Warming of the climate system has been detected in
changes in surface and atmospheric temperatures and in temperatures of the upper several hundred metres of the ocean. The observed pattern of tropospheric warming and stratospheric cooling
is very likely due to the combined influences of GHG increases and
stratospheric ozone depletion. It is likely that increases in GHG
concentrations alone would have caused more warming than observed because volcanic and anthropogenic aerosols have offset
some warming that would otherwise have taken place. {WGI 2.9, 3.2,
3.4, 4.8, 5.2, 7.5, 9.4, 9.5, 9.7, TS.4.1, SPM}
It is likely that there has been significant anthropogenic
warming over the past 50 years averaged over each continent (except Antarctica) (Figure 2.5). {WGI 3.2, 9.4, SPM}
The observed patterns of warming, including greater warming
over land than over the ocean, and their changes over time, are
simulated only by models that include anthropogenic forcing. No
coupled global climate model that has used natural forcing only
has reproduced the continental mean warming trends in individual
continents (except Antarctica) over the second half of the 20th century. {WGI 3.2, 9.4, TS.4.2, SPM}
Difficulties remain in simulating and attributing observed temperature changes at smaller scales. On these scales, natural climate
variability is relatively larger, making it harder to distinguish changes
expected due to external forcings. Uncertainties in local forcings,
such as those due to aerosols and land-use change, and feedbacks
also make it difficult to estimate the contribution of GHG increases
to observed small-scale temperature changes. {WGI 8.3, 9.4, SPM}
Advances since the TAR show that discernible human influences extend beyond average temperature to other aspects of climate, including temperature extremes and wind
patterns. {WGI 9.4, 9.5, SPM}
Temperatures of the most extreme hot nights, cold nights and
cold days are likely to have increased due to anthropogenic forcing.
It is more likely than not that anthropogenic forcing has increased
the risk of heat waves. Anthropogenic forcing is likely to have contributed to changes in wind patterns, affecting extra-tropical storm
tracks and temperature patterns in both hemispheres. However, the
observed changes in the Northern Hemisphere circulation are larger
than simulated by models in response to 20th century forcing change.
{WGI 3.5, 3.6, 9.4, 9.5, 10.3, SPM}
It is very likely that the response to anthropogenic forcing contributed to sea level rise during the latter half of the 20th century.
There is some evidence of the impact of human climatic influence
on the hydrological cycle, including the observed large-scale patterns of changes in land precipitation over the 20th century. It is
more likely than not that human influence has contributed to a global trend towards increases in area affected by drought since the
1970s and the frequency of heavy precipitation events. {WGI 3.3,
5.5, 9.5, TS.4.1, TS.4.3}
Anthropogenic warming over the last three decades has
likely had a discernible influence at the global scale on observed changes in many physical and biological systems.
{WGII 1.4}
A synthesis of studies strongly demonstrates that the spatial
agreement between regions of significant warming across the globe
and the locations of significant observed changes in many natural
systems consistent with warming is very unlikely to be due solely
to natural variability of temperatures or natural variability of the
systems. Several modelling studies have linked some specific responses in physical and biological systems to anthropogenic warming, but only a few such studies have been performed. Taken together with evidence of significant anthropogenic warming over
the past 50 years averaged over each continent (except Antarctica),
it is likely that anthropogenic warming over the last three decades
has had a discernible influence on many natural systems. {WGI 3.2,
9.4, SPM; WGII 1.4, SPM}
Limitations and gaps currently prevent more complete attribution of the causes of observed natural system responses to anthropogenic warming. The available analyses are limited in the number
of systems, length of records and locations considered. Natural temperature variability is larger at the regional than the global scale,
thus affecting identification of changes to external forcing. At the regional scale, other non-climate factors (such as land-use change, pollution and invasive species) are influential. {WGII 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, SPM}



3.1 Emissions scenarios
There is high agreement and much evidence9 that with current climate change mitigation policies and related sustainable development practices, global GHG emissions will continue to grow over the next few decades. Baseline emissions scenarios published since the IPCC Special Report
on Emissions Scenarios (SRES, 2000) are comparable in
range to those presented in SRES (see Box on SRES scenarios and Figure 3.1).10 {WGIII 1.3, 3.2, SPM}
The SRES scenarios project an increase of baseline global GHG
emissions by a range of 9.7 to 36.7 GtCO2
-eq (25 to 90%) between
2000 and 2030. In these scenarios, fossil fuels are projected to
maintain their dominant position in the global energy mix to 2030
and beyond. Hence CO2
 emissions from energy use between 2000
and 2030 are projected to grow 40 to 110% over that period. {WGIII
1.3, SPM}
Studies published since SRES (i.e. post-SRES scenarios) have
used lower values for some drivers for emissions, notably population projections. However, for those studies incorporating these new
population projections, changes in other drivers, such as economic
growth, result in little change in overall emission levels. Economic
growth projections for Africa, Latin America and the Middle East
to 2030 in post-SRES baseline scenarios are lower than in SRES,
but this has only minor effects on global economic growth and overall emissions. {WGIII 3.2, TS.3, SPM}
Aerosols have a net cooling effect and the representation of
aerosol and aerosol precursor emissions, including sulphur dioxide, black carbon and organic carbon, has improved in the postSRES scenarios. Generally, these emissions are projected to be lower
than reported in SRES. {WGIII 3.2, TS.3, SPM}
Available studies indicate that the choice of exchange rate for
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (Market Exchange Rate, MER or
Purchasing Power Parity, PPP) does not appreciably affect the projected emissions, when used consistently.11 The differences, if any,
are small compared to the uncertainties caused by assumptions on
other parameters in the scenarios, e.g. technological change. {WGIII
3.2, TS.3, SPM}

3.2 Projections of future changes in climate
For the next two decades a warming of about 0.2°C per decade is projected for a range of SRES emissions scenarios.
Even if the concentrations of all GHGs and aerosols had
been kept constant at year 2000 levels, a further warming of
about 0.1°C per decade would be expected. Afterwards, temperature projections increasingly depend on specific emissions scenarios (Figure 3.2). {WGI 10.3, 10.7; WGIII 3.2}
Since the IPCC’s first report in 1990, assessed projections have
suggested global averaged temperature increases between about 0.15
and 0.3°C per decade from 1990 to 2005. This can now be compared with observed values of about 0.2°C per decade, strengthening confidence in near-term projections. {WGI 1.2, 3.2}



3.2.1 21st century global changes
Continued GHG emissions at or above current rates would
cause further warming and induce many changes in the global climate system during the 21st century that would very
likely be larger than those observed during the 20th century.
{WGI 10.3}
Advances in climate change modelling now enable best estimates and likely assessed uncertainty ranges to be given for projected warming for different emissions scenarios. Table 3.1 shows
best estimates and likely ranges for global average surface air warming for the six SRES marker emissions scenarios (including climate-carbon cycle feedbacks). {WGI 10.5}
Although these projections are broadly consistent with the span


3.2.2 21st century regional changes
There is now higher confidence than in the TAR in projected
patterns of warming and other regional-scale features, including changes in wind patterns, precipitation and some
aspects of extremes and sea ice. {WGI 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 9.4, 9.5,
10.3, 11.1}
Projected warming in the 21st century shows scenario-independent geographical patterns similar to those observed over the past
several decades. Warming is expected to be greatest over land and
at most high northern latitudes, and least over the Southern Ocean
(near Antarctica) and northern North Atlantic, continuing recent
observed trends (Figure 3.2 right panels). {WGI 10.3, SPM}
Snow cover area is projected to contract. Widespread increases
in thaw depth are projected over most permafrost regions. Sea ice
is projected to shrink in both the Arctic and Antarctic under all
SRES scenarios. In some projections, Arctic late-summer sea ice
disappears almost entirely by the latter part of the 21st century. {WGI
10.3, 10.6, SPM; WGII 15.3.4}
It is very likely that hot extremes, heat waves and heavy precipitation events will become more frequent. {SYR Table 3.2; WGI
10.3, SPM}
Based on a range of models, it is likely that future tropical cyclones (typhoons and hurricanes) will become more intense, with
larger peak wind speeds and more heavy precipitation associated
with ongoing increases of tropical sea-surface temperatures. There
is less confidence in projections of a global decrease in numbers of
tropical cyclones. The apparent increase in the proportion of very
intense storms since 1970 in some regions is much larger than simulated by current models for that period. {WGI 3.8, 9.5, 10.3, SPM}
Extra-tropical storm tracks are projected to move poleward, with
consequent changes in wind, precipitation and temperature patterns,
continuing the broad pattern of observed trends over the last halfcentury. {WGI 3.6, 10.3, SPM}
Since the TAR there is an improving understanding of projected
patterns of precipitation. Increases in the amount of precipitation
are very likely in high-latitudes, while decreases are likely in most
subtropical land regions (by as much as about 20% in the A1B scenario in 2100, Figure 3.3), continuing observed patterns in recent
trends. {WGI 3.3, 8.3, 9.5, 10.3, 11.2-11.9, SPM}

3.2.3 Changes beyond the 21st century
Anthropogenic warming and sea level rise would continue
for centuries due to the time scales associated with climate
processes and feedbacks, even if GHG concentrations were
to be stabilised. {WGI 10.4, 10.5, 10.7, SPM}
If radiative forcing were to be stabilised, keeping all the radiative forcing agents constant at B1 or A1B levels in 2100, model
experiments show that a further increase in global average temperature of about 0.5°C would still be expected by 2200. In addition, thermal expansion alone would lead to 0.3 to 0.8m of sea
level rise by 2300 (relative to 1980-1999). Thermal expansion would
continue for many centuries, due to the time required to transport
heat into the deep ocean. {WGI 10.7, SPM} Contraction of the Greenland ice sheet is projected to continue
to contribute to sea level rise after 2100. Current models suggest
ice mass losses increase with temperature more rapidly than gains
due to increased precipitation and that the surface mass balance
becomes negative (net ice loss) at a global average warming (relative to pre-industrial values) in excess of 1.9 to 4.6°C. If such a
negative surface mass balance were sustained for millennia, that
would lead to virtually complete elimination of the Greenland ice
sheet and a resulting contribution to sea level rise of about 7m. The
corresponding future temperatures in Greenland (1.9 to 4.6°C global) are comparable to those inferred for the last interglacial period
125,000 years ago, when palaeoclimatic information suggests reductions of polar land ice extent and 4 to 6m of sea level rise. {WGI
6.4, 10.7, SPM}
Dynamical processes related to ice flow – which are not included in current models but suggested by recent observations –
could increase the vulnerability of the ice sheets to warming, increasing future sea level rise. Understanding of these processes is
limited and there is no consensus on their magnitude. {WGI 4.6, 10.7,
SPM}
Current global model studies project that the Antarctic ice sheet
will remain too cold for widespread surface melting and gain mass
due to increased snowfall. However, net loss of ice mass could occur if dynamical ice discharge dominates the ice sheet mass balance. {WGI 10.7, SPM}
Both past and future anthropogenic CO2
 emissions will continue to contribute to warming and sea level rise for more than a
millennium, due to the time scales required for the removal of this
gas from the atmosphere. {WGI 7.3, 10.3, Figure 7.12, Figure 10.35, SPM}
Estimated long-term (multi-century) warming corresponding to
the six AR4 WG III stabilisation categories is shown in Figure 3.4.


3 Climate change and its impacts in the near and long term under different scenarios
48
3.3 Impacts of future climate changes
More specific information is now available across a wide
range of systems and sectors concerning the nature of future impacts, including some fields not covered in previous
assessments. {WGII TS.4, SPM}
The following is a selection of key findings14 regarding the
impacts of climate change on systems, sectors and regions, as well
as some findings on vulnerability15, for the range of climate changes
projected over the 21st century. Unless otherwise stated, the confidence level in the projections is high. Global average temperature
increases are given relative to 1980-1999. Additional information
on impacts can be found in the WG II report. {WGII SPM}
3.3.1 Impacts on systems and sectors
Ecosystems
 The resilience of many ecosystems is likely to be exceeded this
century by an unprecedented combination of climate change,
associated disturbances (e.g. flooding, drought, wildfire, insects,
ocean acidification) and other global change drivers (e.g. landuse change, pollution, fragmentation of natural systems, overexploitation of resources). {WGII 4.1-4.6, SPM}
 Over the course of this century, net carbon uptake by terrestrial
ecosystems is likely to peak before mid-century and then weaken
or even reverse16, thus amplifying climate change. {WGII 4.ES,
Figure 4.2, SPM}
 Approximately 20 to 30% of plant and animal species assessed
so far are likely to be at increased risk of extinction if increases
in global average temperature exceed 1.5 to 2.5°C (medium confidence). {WGII 4.ES, Figure 4.2, SPM}
 For increases in global average temperature exceeding 1.5 to
2.5°C and in concomitant atmospheric CO2
 concentrations, there
are projected to be major changes in ecosystem structure and
function, species’ ecological interactions and shifts in species’
geographical ranges, with predominantly negative consequences
for biodiversity and ecosystem goods and services, e.g. water
and food supply. {WGII 4.4, Box TS.6, SPM}
Food
 Crop productivity is projected to increase slightly at mid- to
high latitudes for local mean temperature increases of up to 1
to 3°C depending on the crop, and then decrease beyond that in
some regions (medium confidence). {WGII 5.4, SPM}
 At lower latitudes, especially in seasonally dry and tropical
regions, crop productivity is projected to decrease for even small
local temperature increases (1 to 2°C), which would increase
the risk of hunger (medium confidence). {WGII 5.4, SPM}
 Globally, the potential for food production is projected to increase with increases in local average temperature over a range
of 1 to 3°C, but above this it is projected to decrease (medium
confidence). {WGII 5.4, 5.5, SPM}
Coasts
 Coasts are projected to be exposed to increasing risks, including coastal erosion, due to climate change and sea level rise.
The effect will be exacerbated by increasing human-induced
pressures on coastal areas (very high confidence). {WGII 6.3, 6.4,
SPM}
 By the 2080s, many millions more people than today are projected to experience floods every year due to sea level rise. The
numbers affected will be largest in the densely populated and
low-lying megadeltas of Asia and Africa while small islands
are especially vulnerable (very high confidence). {WGII 6.4, 6.5,
Table 6.11, SPM}
Industry, settlements and society
 The most vulnerable industries, settlements and societies are
generally those in coastal and river flood plains, those whose
economies are closely linked with climate-sensitive resources
and those in areas prone to extreme weather events, especially
where rapid urbanisation is occurring. {WGII 7.1, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5,
SPM}
 Poor communities can be especially vulnerable, in particular
those concentrated in high-risk areas. {WGII 7.2, 7.4, 5.4, SPM}
Health
 The health status of millions of people is projected to be affected through, for example, increases in malnutrition; increased
deaths, diseases and injury due to extreme weather events; increased burden of diarrhoeal diseases; increased frequency of
cardio-respiratory diseases due to higher concentrations of
ground-level ozone in urban areas related to climate change;
and the altered spatial distribution of some infectious diseases.
{WGI 7.4, Box 7.4; WGII 8.ES, 8.2, 8.4, SPM}
 Climate change is projected to bring some benefits in temperate areas, such as fewer deaths from cold exposure, and some
mixed effects such as changes in range and transmission potential of malaria in Africa. Overall it is expected that benefits will
be outweighed by the negative health effects of rising temperatures, especially in developing countries. {WGII 8.4, 8.7, 8ES, SPM}
 Critically important will be factors that directly shape the health
of populations such as education, health care, public health initiatives, and infrastructure and economic development. {WGII
8.3, SPM}
Water
 Water impacts are key for all sectors and regions. These are
discussed below in the Box ‘Climate change and water’.
Studies since the TAR have enabled more systematic understanding of the timing and magnitude of impacts related
to differing amounts and rates of climate change. {WGII SPM}
Examples of this new information for systems and sectors are
presented in Figure 3.6. The upper panel shows impacts increasing
with increasing temperature change. Their estimated magnitude and
timing is also affected by development pathways (lower panel).
{WGII SPM}
Depending on circumstances, some of the impacts shown in Figure 3.6 could be associated with ‘key vulnerabilities’, based on a number of criteria in the literature (magnitude, timing, persistence/
reversibility, the potential for adaptation, distributional aspects, likeli



3.3.2 Impacts on regions17
Africa
 By 2020, between 75 and 250 million of people are projected
to be exposed to increased water stress due to climate change.
{WGII 9.4, SPM}
 By 2020, in some countries, yields from rain-fed agriculture
could be reduced by up to 50%. Agricultural production, including access to food, in many African countries is projected
to be severely compromised. This would further adversely affect food security and exacerbate malnutrition. {WGII 9.4, SPM}
 Towards the end of the 21st century, projected sea level rise
will affect low-lying coastal areas with large populations. The
cost of adaptation could amount to at least 5 to 10% of GDP.
{WGII 9.4, SPM}
 By 2080, an increase of 5 to 8% of arid and semi-arid land in
Africa is projected under a range of climate scenarios (high
confidence). {WGII Box TS.6, 9.4.4}
Asia
 By the 2050s, freshwater availability in Central, South, East
and South-East Asia, particularly in large river basins, is projected to decrease. {WGII 10.4, SPM}
 Coastal areas, especially heavily populated megadelta regions
in South, East and South-East Asia, will be at greatest risk due
to increased flooding from the sea and, in some megadeltas,
flooding from the rivers. {WGII 10.4, SPM}
 Climate change is projected to compound the pressures on natural resources and the environment associated with rapid
urbanisation, industrialisation and economic development. {WGII
10.4, SPM}
 Endemic morbidity and mortality due to diarrhoeal disease primarily associated with floods and droughts are expected to rise
in East, South and South-East Asia due to projected changes in
the hydrological cycle. {WGII 10.4, SPM}
Australia and New Zealand
 By 2020, significant loss of biodiversity is projected to occur
in some ecologically rich sites, including the Great Barrier Reef
and Queensland Wet Tropics. {WGII 11.4, SPM}
 By 2030, water security problems are projected to intensify in
southern and eastern Australia and, in New Zealand, in
Northland and some eastern regions. {WGII 11.4, SPM}
 By 2030, production from agriculture and forestry is projected
to decline over much of southern and eastern Australia, and
over parts of eastern New Zealand, due to increased drought
and fire. However, in New Zealand, initial benefits are projected in some other regions. {WGII 11.4, SPM}
 By 2050, ongoing coastal development and population growth
in some areas of Australia and New Zealand are projected to
exacerbate risks from sea level rise and increases in the severity and frequency of storms and coastal flooding. {WGII 11.4,
SPM}
Europe
 Climate change is expected to magnify regional differences in
Europe’s natural resources and assets. Negative impacts will
include increased risk of inland flash floods and more frequent
coastal flooding and increased erosion (due to storminess and
sea level rise). {WGII 12.4, SPM}
 Mountainous areas will face glacier retreat, reduced snow cover
and winter tourism, and extensive species losses (in some areas
up to 60% under high emissions scenarios by 2080). {WGII 12.4,
SPM}
 In southern Europe, climate change is projected to worsen conditions (high temperatures and drought) in a region already vulnerable to climate variability, and to reduce water availability,
hydropower potential, summer tourism and, in general, crop
productivity. {WGII 12.4, SPM}
 Climate change is also projected to increase the health risks
due to heat waves and the frequency of wildfires. {WGII 12.4,
SPM}
Latin America
 By mid-century, increases in temperature and associated decreases in soil water are projected to lead to gradual replacement of tropical forest by savanna in eastern Amazonia. Semiarid vegetation will tend to be replaced by arid-land vegetation. {WGII 13.4, SPM}
 There is a risk of significant biodiversity loss through species
extinction in many areas of tropical Latin America. {WGII 13.4,
SPM}
 Productivity of some important crops is projected to decrease
and livestock productivity to decline, with adverse consequences
for food security. In temperate zones, soybean yields are projected to increase. Overall, the number of people at risk of hunger is projected to increase (medium confidence). {WGII 13.4,
Box TS.6}
 Changes in precipitation patterns and the disappearance of glaciers are projected to significantly affect water availability for
human consumption, agriculture and energy generation. {WGII
13.4, SPM}
North America
 Warming in western mountains is projected to cause decreased
snowpack, more winter flooding and reduced summer flows,
exacerbating competition for over-allocated water resources.
{WGII 14.4, SPM}
 In the early decades of the century, moderate climate change is
projected to increase aggregate yields of rain-fed agriculture
by 5 to 20%, but with important variability among regions. Major challenges are projected for crops that are near the warm
end of their suitable range or which depend on highly utilised
water resources. {WGII 14.4, SPM}
 Cities that currently experience heat waves are expected to be
further challenged by an increased number, intensity and duration of heat waves during the course of the century, with potential for adverse health impacts. {WGII 14.4, SPM}
 Coastal communities and habitats will be increasingly stressed
by climate change impacts interacting with development and
pollution. {WGII 14.4, SPM}
Polar Regions
 The main projected biophysical effects are reductions in thickness and extent of glaciers, ice sheets and sea ice, and changes
in natural ecosystems with detrimental effects on many organisms including migratory birds, mammals and higher predators.
{WGII 15.4, SPM}
 For human communities in the Arctic, impacts, particularly those
resulting from changing snow and ice conditions, are projected
to be mixed. {WGII 15.4, SPM}
 Detrimental impacts would include those on infrastructure and
traditional indigenous ways of life. {WGII 15.4, SPM}
 In both polar regions, specific ecosystems and habitats are projected to be vulnerable, as climatic barriers to species invasions
are lowered. {WGII 15.4, SPM}
Small Islands
 Sea level rise is expected to exacerbate inundation, storm surge,
erosion and other coastal hazards, thus threatening vital infrastructure, settlements and facilities that support the livelihood
of island communities. {WGII 16.4, SPM}
 Deterioration in coastal conditions, for example through erosion of beaches and coral bleaching, is expected to affect local
resources. {WGII 16.4, SPM}
 By mid-century, climate change is expected to reduce water
resources in many small islands, e.g. in the Caribbean and Pacific, to the point where they become insufficient to meet demand during low-rainfall periods. {WGII 16.4, SPM}
 With higher temperatures, increased invasion by non-native
species is expected to occur, particularly on mid- and high-latitude islands. {WGII 16.4, SPM}


3.3.3 Especially affected systems, sectors and regions
Some systems, sectors and regions are likely to be especially affected by climate change.18 {WGII TS.4.5}
Systems and sectors: {WGII TS.4.5}
 particular ecosystems:
- terrestrial: tundra, boreal forest and mountain regions because of sensitivity to warming; mediterranean-type ecosystems because of reduction in rainfall; and tropical rainforests
where precipitation declines
- coastal: mangroves and salt marshes, due to multiple stresses
- marine: coral reefs due to multiple stresses; the sea-ice biome
because of sensitivity to warming
 water resources in some dry regions at mid-latitudes19 and in
the dry tropics, due to changes in rainfall and evapotranspiration, and in areas dependent on snow and ice melt
 agriculture in low latitudes, due to reduced water availability
 low-lying coastal systems, due to threat of sea level rise and
increased risk from extreme weather events
 human health in populations with low adaptive capacity.
Regions: {WGII TS.4.5}
 the Arctic, because of the impacts of high rates of projected
warming on natural systems and human communities
 Africa, because of low adaptive capacity and projected climate
change impacts
 small islands, where there is high exposure of population and
infrastructure to projected climate change impacts
 Asian and African megadeltas, due to large populations and
high exposure to sea level rise, storm surges and river flooding.
Within other areas, even those with high incomes, some people
(such as the poor, young children and the elderly) can be particularly at risk, and also some areas and some activities. {WGII 7.1, 7.2,
7.4, 8.2, 8.4, TS.4.5}


3.3.4 Ocean acidification
The uptake of anthropogenic carbon since 1750 has led to the
ocean becoming more acidic with an average decrease in pH of 0.1
units. Increasing atmospheric CO2
 concentrations lead to further
acidification. Projections based on SRES scenarios give a reduction in average global surface ocean pH of between 0.14 and 0.35
units over the 21st century. While the effects of observed ocean acidification on the marine biosphere are as yet undocumented, the progressive acidification of oceans is expected to have negative impacts on marine shell-forming organisms (e.g. corals) and their dependent species. {WGI SPM; WGII SPM}



3.3.5 Extreme events
Altered frequencies and intensities of extreme weather, together with sea level rise, are expected to have mostly adverse
effects on natural and human systems (Table 3.2). {WGII SPM}
Examples for selected extremes and sectors are shown in Table 3.2.
3.4 Risk of abrupt or irreversible changes
Anthropogenic warming could lead to some impacts that
are abrupt or irreversible, depending upon the rate and
magnitude of the climate change. {WGII 12.6, 19.3, 19.4, SPM}
Abrupt climate change on decadal time scales is normally
thought of as involving ocean circulation changes. In addition on
longer time scales, ice sheet and ecosystem changes may also play
a role. If a large-scale abrupt climate change were to occur, its impact could be quite high (see Topic 5.2). {WGI 8.7, 10.3, 10.7; WGII
4.4, 19.3}
Partial loss of ice sheets on polar land and/or the thermal expansion of seawater over very long time scales could imply metres
of sea level rise, major changes in coastlines and inundation of
low-lying areas, with greatest effects in river deltas and low-lying
islands. Current models project that such changes would occur over
very long time scales (millennial) if a global temperature increase
of 1.9 to 4.6°C (relative to pre-industrial) were to be sustained.
Rapid sea level rise on century time scales cannot be excluded.
{SYR 3.2.3; WGI 6.4, 10.7; WGII 19.3, SPM}
Climate change is likely to lead to some irreversible impacts.
There is medium confidence that approximately 20 to 30% of species assessed so far are likely to be at increased risk of extinction if
increases in global average warming exceed 1.5 to 2.5°C (relative
to 1980-1999). As global average temperature increase exceeds
about 3.5°C, model projections suggest significant extinctions (40
to 70% of species assessed) around the globe. {WGII 4.4, Figure SPM.2}
Based on current model simulations, it is very likely that the
meridional overturning circulation (MOC) of the Atlantic Ocean
will slow down during the 21st century; nevertheless temperatures
in the region are projected to increase. It is very unlikely that the
MOC will undergo a large abrupt transition during the 21stcentury.
Longer-term changes in the MOC cannot be assessed with confidence. {WGI 10.3, 10.7; WGII Figure, Table TS.5, SPM.2}
Impacts of large-scale and persistent changes in the MOC are
likely to include changes in marine ecosystem productivity, fisheries, ocean CO2
 uptake, oceanic oxygen concentrations and terrestrial vegetation. Changes in terrestrial and ocean CO2
 uptake may
feed back on the climate system. {WGII 12.6, 19.3, Figure SPM.2}



4.1 Responding to climate change
Societies can respond to climate change by adapting to its impacts
and by reducing GHG emissions (mitigation), thereby reducing the
rate and magnitude of change. This Topic focuses on adaptation and
mitigation options that can be implemented over the next two to three
decades, and their inter-relationship with sustainable development.
These responses can be complementary. Topic 5 addresses their complementary roles on a more conceptual basis over a longer timeframe.
The capacity to adapt and mitigate is dependent on socio-economic and environmental circumstances and the availability of information and technology20 . However, much less information is
available about the costs and effectiveness of adaptation measures
than about mitigation measures. {WGII 17.1, 17.3; WGIII 1.2}


4.2 Adaptation options
Adaptation can reduce vulnerability, both in the short and
the long term. {WGII 17.2, 18.1, 18.5, 20.3, 20.8}
Vulnerability to climate change can be exacerbated by other
stresses. These arise from, for example, current climate hazards,
poverty, unequal access to resources, food insecurity, trends in economic globalisation, conflict and incidence of diseases such as HIV/
AIDS. {WGII 7.2, 7.4, 8.3, 17.3, 20.3, 20.4, 20.7, SPM}
Societies across the world have a long record of adapting and
reducing their vulnerability to the impacts of weather- and climaterelated events such as floods, droughts and storms. Nevertheless,
additional adaptation measures will be required at regional and local levels to reduce the adverse impacts of projected climate change
and variability, regardless of the scale of mitigation undertaken over
the next two to three decades. However, adaptation alone is not
expected to cope with all the projected effects of climate change,
especially not over the long term as most impacts increase in magnitude. {WGII 17.2, SPM; WGIII 1.2}
A wide array of adaptation options is available, but more extensive adaptation than is currently occurring is required to reduce
vulnerability to climate change. There are barriers, limits and costs,
which are not fully understood. Some planned adaptation is already
occurring on a limited basis. Table 4.1 provides examples of planned
20 Technology is defined as the practical application of knowledge to achieve particular tasks that employs both technical artefacts (hardware, equipment)
and (social) information (‘software’, know-how for production and use of artefacts).
adaptation options by sector. Many adaptation actions have multiple drivers, such as economic development and poverty alleviation, and are embedded within broader development, sectoral, regional and local planning initiatives such as water resources planning, coastal defence and disaster risk reduction strategies. Examples of this approach are the Bangladesh National Water Management Plan and the coastal defence plans of The Netherlands
and Norway, which incorporate specific climate change scenarios.
{WGII 1.3, 5.5.2, 11.6, 17.2}
Comprehensive estimates of the costs and benefits of adaptation at the global level are limited in number. However, the number
of adaptation cost and benefit estimates at the regional and project
levels for impacts on specific sectors, such as agriculture, energy
demand for heating and cooling, water resources management and
infrastructure, is growing. Based on these studies there is high confidence that there are viable adaptation options that can be implemented in some of these sectors at low cost and/or with high benefit-cost ratios. Empirical research also suggests that higher benefit-cost ratios can be achieved by implementing some adaptation
measures at an early stage compared to retrofitting long-lived infrastructure at a later date. {WGII 17.2}
Adaptive capacity is intimately connected to social and economic development, but it is not evenly distributed across
and within societies. {WGII 7.1, 7.2, 7.4, 17.3}
The capacity to adapt is dynamic and is influenced by a society’s
productive base, including natural and man-made capital assets,
social networks and entitlements, human capital and institutions,
governance, national income, health and technology. It is also affected by multiple climate and non-climate stresses, as well as development policy. {WGII 17.3}
Recent studies reaffirm the TAR finding that adaptation will be
vital and beneficial. However, financial, technological, cognitive,
behavioural, political, social, institutional and cultural constraints limit
both the implementation and effectiveness of adaptation measures.
Even societies with high adaptive capacity remain vulnerable to climate change, variability and extremes. For example, a heat wave in
2003 caused high levels of mortality in European cities (especially
among the elderly), and Hurricane Katrina in 2005 caused large human and financial costs in the United States. {WGII 7.4, 8.2, 17.4}


4.3 Mitigation options
Both bottom-up and top-down studies21 indicate that there
is high agreement and much evidence of substantial economic potential21 for the mitigation of global GHG emissions
over the coming decades that could offset the projected
growth of global emissions or reduce emissions below current levels. {WGIII 11.3, SPM}
Figure 4.1 compares global economic mitigation potential in
2030 with the projected emissions increase from 2000 to 2030.
Bottom-up studies suggest that mitigation opportunities with net
negative costs22 have the potential to reduce emissions by about 6
GtCO2
-eq/yr in 2030. Realising these requires dealing with implementation barriers. The economic mitigation potential, which is
generally greater than the market mitigation potential, can only be
achieved when adequate policies are in place and barriers removed.21
{WGIII 11.3, SPM}
Sectoral estimates of economic mitigation potential and marginal costs derived from bottom-up studies corrected for double
counting of mitigation potential are shown in Figure 4.2. While
top-down and bottom-up studies are in line at the global level, there
are considerable differences at the sectoral level. {WGIII 11.3, SPM}
No single technology can provide all of the mitigation
potential in any sector. Table 4.2 lists selected examples of key technologies, policies, constraints and opportunities by sector. {WGIII SPM}
Future energy infrastructure investment decisions, expected to
total over US$20 trillion23 between 2005 and 2030, will have longterm impacts on GHG emissions, because of the long lifetimes of
energy plants and other infrastructure capital stock. The widespread
diffusion of low-carbon technologies may take many decades, even
if early investments in these technologies are made attractive. Initial estimates show that returning global energy-related CO2
 emissions to 2005 levels by 2030 would require a large shift in the pattern of investment, although the net additional investment required
ranges from negligible to 5 to 10%. {WGIII 4.1, 4.4, 11.6, SPM}
While studies use different methodologies, there is high
agreement and much evidence that in all analysed world
regions near-term health co-benefits from reduced air pollution, as a result of actions to reduce GHG emissions, can
be substantial and may offset a substantial fraction of mitigation costs. {WGIII 11.8, SPM}
Energy efficiency and utilisation of renewable energy offer synergies with sustainable development. In least developed countries,
energy substitution can lower mortality and morbidity by reducing
indoor air pollution, reduce the workload for women and children
and decrease the unsustainable use of fuelwood and related deforestation. {WGIII 11.8, 11.9, 12.4}
Literature since the TAR confirms with high agreement and
medium evidence that there may be effects from Annex I
countries’ action on the global economy and global emissions, although the scale of carbon leakage remains uncertain. {WGIII 11.7, SPM}
Fossil fuel exporting nations (in both Annex I and non-Annex I
countries) may expect, as indicated in the TAR, lower demand and
prices and lower GDP growth due to mitigation policies. The extent of this spillover depends strongly on assumptions related to
policy decisions and oil market conditions. {WGIII 11.7, SPM}
Critical uncertainties remain in the assessment of carbon leakage. Most equilibrium modelling supports the conclusion in the
TAR of economy-wide leakage from Kyoto action in the order of 5
to 20%, which would be less if competitive low-emissions technologies were effectively diffused. {WGIII 11.7, SPM}
There is also high agreement and medium evidence that
changes in lifestyle and behaviour patterns can contribute
to climate change mitigation across all sectors. Management practices can also have a positive role. {WGIII SPM}
Examples that can have positive impacts on mitigation include
changes in consumption patterns, education and training, changes
in building occupant behaviour, transport demand management and
management tools in industry. {WGIII 4.1, 5.1, 6.7, 7.3, SPM}
Policies that provide a real or implicit price of carbon could
create incentives for producers and consumers to significantly invest in low-GHG products, technologies and processes. {WGIII SPM}
An effective carbon-price signal could realise significant mitigation potential in all sectors. Modelling studies show that global
carbon prices rising to US$20-80/tCO2
-eq by 2030 are consistent
with stabilisation at around 550ppm CO2
-eq by 2100. For the same stabilisation level, studies since the TAR that take into account induced technological change may lower these price ranges to US$5-
65/tCO2
-eq in 2030.24 {WGIII 3.3, 11.4, 11.5, SPM}
There is high agreement and much evidence that a wide
variety of national policies and instruments are available to
governments to create the incentives for mitigation action.
Their applicability depends on national circumstances and
an understanding of their interactions, but experience from
implementation in various countries and sectors shows
there are advantages and disadvantages for any given instrument. {WGIII 13.2, SPM}
Four main criteria are used to evaluate policies and instruments:
environmental effectiveness, cost effectiveness, distributional
effects including equity, and institutional feasibility. {WGIII 13.2, SPM}
General findings about the performance of policies are: {WGIII
13.2, SPM}
 Integrating climate policies in broader development policies
makes implementation and overcoming barriers easier.
 Regulations and standards generally provide some certainty
about emission levels. They may be preferable to other instruments when information or other barriers prevent producers and
consumers from responding to price signals. However, they may
not induce innovations and more advanced technologies.
 Taxes and charges can set a price for carbon, but cannot guarantee a particular level of emissions. Literature identifies taxes
as an efficient way of internalising costs of GHG emissions.
 Tradable permits will establish a carbon price. The volume of
allowed emissions determines their environmental effectiveness,
while the allocation of permits has distributional consequences.
Fluctuation in the price of carbon makes it difficult to estimate
the total cost of complying with emission permits.
 Financial incentives (subsidies and tax credits) are frequently
used by governments to stimulate the development and diffusion of new technologies. While economic costs are generally
higher than for the instruments listed above, they are often critical to overcome barriers.
 Voluntary agreements between industry and governments are
politically attractive, raise awareness among stakeholders and
have played a role in the evolution of many national policies.
The majority of agreements have not achieved significant emissions reductions beyond business as usual. However, some recent agreements, in a few countries, have accelerated the application of best available technology and led to measurable emission reductions.
 Information instruments (e.g. awareness campaigns) may positively affect environmental quality by promoting informed
choices and possibly contributing to behavioural change, however, their impact on emissions has not been measured yet.
 Research, development and demonstration (RD&D) can stimulate technological advances, reduce costs and enable progress
toward stabilisation.
Some corporations, local and regional authorities, NGOs and
civil groups are adopting a wide variety of voluntary actions. These
voluntary actions may limit GHG emissions, stimulate innovative
policies and encourage the deployment of new technologies. On
their own, they generally have limited impact on national- or regional-level emissions. {WGIII 13.4, SPM}


4.4 Relationship between adaptation and
mitigation options and relationship with
sustainable development
There is growing understanding of the possibilities to
choose and implement climate response options in several
sectors to realise synergies and avoid conflicts with other
dimensions of sustainable development. {WGIII SPM}
Climate change policies related to energy efficiency and renewable energy are often economically beneficial, improve energy security and reduce local pollutant emissions. Reducing both loss of
natural habitat and deforestation can have significant biodiversity,
soil and water conservation benefits, and can be implemented in a
socially and economically sustainable manner. Forestation and
bioenergy plantations can restore degraded land, manage water runoff, retain soil carbon and benefit rural economies, but could compete with food production and may be negative for biodiversity, if
not properly designed. {WGII 20.3, 20.8; WGIII 4.5, 9.7, 12.3, SPM}
There is growing evidence that decisions about macro-economic
policy, agricultural policy, multilateral development bank lending,
insurance practices, electricity market reform, energy security and
forest conservation, for example, which are often treated as being
apart from climate policy, can significantly reduce emissions (Table
4.3). Similarly, non-climate policies can affect adaptive capacity
and vulnerability. {WGII 20.3; WGIII SPM, 12.3}
Both synergies and trade-offs exist between adaptation and
mitigation options. {WGII 18.4.3; WGIII 11.9)
Examples of synergies include properly designed biomass production, formation of protected areas, land management, energy
use in buildings, and forestry, but synergies are rather limited in
other sectors. Potential trade-offs include increased GHG emissions
due to increased consumption of energy related to adaptive responses. {WGII 18.4.3, 18.5, 18.7, TS.5.2; WGIII 4.5, 6.9, 8.5, 9.5, SPM}


4.5 International and regional cooperation
There is high agreement and much evidence that notable
achievements of the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol are
the establishment of a global response to the climate change
problem, stimulation of an array of national policies, the
creation of an international carbon market and the establishment of new institutional mechanisms that may provide
the foundation for future mitigation efforts. Progress has
also been made in addressing adaptation within the UNFCCC
and additional initiatives have been suggested. {WGII 18.7;
WGIII 13.3, SPM}
The impact of the Protocol’s first commitment period relative
to global emissions is projected to be limited. Its economic impacts
on participating Annex-B countries are projected to be smaller than
presented in the TAR, which showed 0.2 to 2% lower GDP in 2012
without emissions trading and 0.1 to 1.1% lower GDP with emissions trading among Annex-B countries. To be more environmentally effective, future mitigation efforts would need to achieve deeper
reductions covering a higher share of global emissions (see Topic
5). {WGIII 1.4, 11.4, 13.3, SPM}
The literature provides high agreement and much evidence
of many options for achieving reductions of global GHG
emissions at the international level through cooperation. It
also suggests that successful agreements are environmentally effective, cost-effective, incorporate distributional considerations and equity, and are institutionally feasible. {WGIII
13.3, SPM}
Greater cooperative efforts to reduce emissions will help to reduce global costs for achieving a given level of mitigation, or will
improve environmental effectiveness. Improving and expanding the
scope of market mechanisms (such as emission trading, Joint Implementation and Clean Development Mechanism) could reduce overall
mitigation costs. {WGIII 13.3, SPM}
Efforts to address climate change can include diverse elements
such as emissions targets; sectoral, local, sub-national and regional
actions; RD&D programmes; adopting common policies; implementing development-oriented actions; or expanding financing instruments. These elements can be implemented in an integrated
fashion, but comparing the efforts made by different countries
quantitatively would be complex and resource intensive. {WGIII 13.3,
SPM}
Actions that could be taken by participating countries can be
differentiated both in terms of when such action is undertaken, who
participates and what the action will be. Actions can be binding or
non-binding, include fixed or dynamic targets, and participation
can be static or vary over time. {WGIII 13.3, SPM}


5.1 Risk management perspective
Responding to climate change involves an iterative risk
management process that includes both mitigation and adaptation, taking into account actual and avoided climate
change damages, co-benefits, sustainability, equity and attitudes to risk. {WGII 20. 9, SPM; WGIII SPM}
Risk management techniques can explicitly accommodate sectoral,
regional and temporal diversity, but their application requires information about not only impacts resulting from the most likely climate scenarios, but also impacts arising from lower-probability but higher-consequence events and the consequences of proposed policies and measures. Risk is generally understood to be the product of the likelihood
of an event and its consequences. Climate change impacts depend on
the characteristics of natural and human systems, their development
pathways and their specific locations. {SYR 3.3, Figure 3.6; WGII 20.2,
20.9, SPM; WGIII 3.5, 3.6, SPM



5.2 Key vulnerabilities, impacts and risks –
long-term perspectives
The five ‘reasons for concern’ identified in the TAR are now
assessed to be stronger with many risks identified with
higher confidence. Some are projected to be larger or to
occur at lower increases in temperature. This is due to (1)
better understanding of the magnitude of impacts and risks
associated with increases in global average temperature and
GHG concentrations, including vulnerability to present-day
climate variability, (2) more precise identification of the circumstances that make systems, sectors, groups and regions
especially vulnerable and (3) growing evidence that the risk
of very large impacts on multiple century time scales would
continue to increase as long as GHG concentrations and
temperature continue to increase. Understanding about the
relationship between impacts (the basis for ‘reasons for concern’ in the TAR) and vulnerability (that includes the ability
to adapt to impacts) has improved. {WGII 4.4, 5.4, 19.ES, 19.3.7,
TS.4.6; WGIII 3.5, SPM}
The TAR concluded that vulnerability to climate change is a function of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity. Adaptation can reduce sensitivity to climate change while mitigation can reduce the
exposure to climate change, including its rate and extent. Both conclusions are confirmed in this assessment. {WGII 20.2, 20.7.3}
No single metric can adequately describe the diversity of key
vulnerabilities or support their ranking. A sample of relevant impacts is provided in Figure 3.6. The estimation of key vulnerabilities in any system, and damage implied, will depend on exposure
(the rate and magnitude of climate change), sensitivity, which is
determined in part and where relevant by development status, and
adaptive capacity. Some key vulnerabilities may be linked to thresholds; in some cases these may cause a system to shift from one state
to another, whereas others have thresholds that are defined subjectively and thus depend on societal values. {WGII 19.ES, 19.1}
The five ‘reasons for concern’ that were identified in the TAR
were intended to synthesise information on climate risks and key
vulnerabilities and to “aid readers in making their own determination” about risk. These remain a viable framework to consider key
vulnerabilities, and they have been updated in the AR4. {TAR WGII
Chapter 19; WGII SPM}
 Risks to unique and threatened systems. There is new and
stronger evidence of observed impacts of climate change on
unique and vulnerable systems (such as polar and high mountain communities and ecosystems), with increasing levels of
adverse impacts as temperatures increase further. An increasing risk of species extinction and coral reef damage is projected
with higher confidence than in the TAR as warming proceeds.
There is medium confidence that approximately 20 to 30% of
plant and animal species assessed so far are likely to be at increased risk of extinction if increases in global average temperature exceed 1.5 to 2.5°C over 1980-1999 levels. Confidence
has increased that a 1 to 2°C increase in global mean temperature above 1990 levels (about 1.5 to 2.5°C above pre-industrial) poses significant risks to many unique and threatened systems including many biodiversity hotspots. Corals are vulnerable to thermal stress and have low adaptive capacity. Increases
in sea surface temperature of about 1 to 3°C are projected to
result in more frequent coral bleaching events and widespread
mortality, unless there is thermal adaptation or acclimatisation
by corals. Increasing vulnerability of Arctic indigenous communities and small island communities to warming is projected.
{SYR 3.3, 3.4, Figure 3.6, Table 3.2; WGII 4.ES, 4.4, 6.4, 14.4.6, 15.ES,
15.4, 15.6, 16.ES, 16.2.1, 16.4, Table 19.1, 19.3.7, TS.5.3, Figure TS.12,
Figure TS.14}
 Risks of extreme weather events. Responses to some recent
extreme climate events reveal higher levels of vulnerability in
both developing and developed countries than was assessed in
the TAR. There is now higher confidence in the projected increases in droughts, heat waves and floods, as well as their adverse impacts. As summarised in Table 3.2, increases in drought,
heat waves and floods are projected in many regions and would
have mostly adverse impacts, including increased water stress
and wild fire frequency, adverse effects on food production,
adverse health effects, increased flood risk and extreme high
sea level, and damage to infrastructure. {SYR 3.2, 3.3, Table 3.2;
WGI 10.3, Table SPM.2; WGII 1.3, 5.4, 7.1, 7.5, 8.2, 12.6, 19.3, Table
19.1, Table SPM.1}
 Distribution of impacts and vulnerabilities. There are sharp
differences across regions and those in the weakest economic
position are often the most vulnerable to climate change and
are frequently the most susceptible to climate-related damages,
especially when they face multiple stresses. There is increasing
evidence of greater vulnerability of specific groups such as the
poor and elderly not only in developing but also in developed
countries. There is greater confidence in the projected regional
patterns of climate change (see Topic 3.2) and in the projections of regional impacts, enabling better identification of particularly vulnerable systems, sectors and regions (see Topic 3.3).
Moreover, there is increased evidence that low-latitude and lessdeveloped areas generally face greater risk, for example in dry
areas and megadeltas. New studies confirm that Africa is one
of the most vulnerable continents because of the range of projected impacts, multiple stresses and low adaptive capacity.
Substantial risks due to sea level rise are projected particularly
for Asian megadeltas and for small island communities. {SYR
3.2, 3.3, 5.4; WGI 11.2-11.7, SPM; WGII 3.4.3, 5.3, 5.4, Boxes 7.1 and
7.4, 8.1.1, 8.4.2, 8.6.1.3, 8.7, 9.ES, Table 10.9, 10.6, 16.3, 19.ES, 19.3,
Table 19.1, 20.ES, TS.4.5, TS.5.4, Tables TS.1, TS.3, TS.4, SPM}
 Aggregate impacts. Compared to the TAR, initial net marketbased benefits from climate change are projected to peak at a
lower magnitude and therefore sooner than was assessed in the
TAR. It is likely that there will be higher damages for larger
magnitudes of global temperature increase than estimated in
the TAR, and the net costs of impacts of increased warming are
projected to increase over time. Aggregate impacts have also
been quantified in other metrics (see Topic 3.3): for example,climate change over the next century is likely to adversely affect hundreds of millions of people through increased coastal
flooding, reductions in water supplies, increased malnutrition
and increased health impacts. {SYR 3.3, Figure 3.6; WGII 19.3.7,
20.7.3, TS.5.3}
 Risks of large-scale singularities.26 As discussed in Topic 3.4,
during the current century, a large-scale abrupt change in the
meridional overturning circulation is very unlikely. There is high
confidence that global warming over many centuries would lead
to a sea level rise contribution from thermal expansion alone
that is projected to be much larger than observed over the 20th
century, with loss of coastal area and associated impacts. There
is better understanding than in the TAR that the risk of additional contributions to sea level rise from both the Greenland
and possibly Antarctic ice sheets may be larger than projected
by ice sheet models and could occur on century time scales.
This is because ice dynamical processes seen in recent observations but not fully included in ice sheet models assessed in
the AR4 could increase the rate of ice loss. Complete
deglaciation of the Greenland ice sheet would raise sea level
by 7m and could be irreversible. {SYR 3.4; WGI 10.3, Box 10.1;
WGII 19.3.7, SPM}


5.3 Adaptation and mitigation
There is high confidence that neither adaptation nor mitigation alone can avoid all climate change impacts. Adaptation
is necessary both in the short term and longer term to address impacts resulting from the warming that would occur
even for the lowest stabilisation scenarios assessed. There
are barriers, limits and costs that are not fully understood.
Adaptation and mitigation can complement each other and
together can significantly reduce the risks of climate change.
{WGII 4.ES, TS 5.1, 18.4, 18.6, 20.7, SPM; WGIII 1.2, 2.5, 3.5, 3.6}
Adaptation will be ineffective for some cases such as natural
ecosystems (e.g. loss of Arctic sea ice and marine ecosystem viability), the disappearance of mountain glaciers that play vital roles
in water storage and supply, or adaptation to sea level rise of several metres27. It will be less feasible or very costly in many cases for
the projected climate change beyond the next several decades (such
as deltaic regions and estuaries). There is high confidence that the
ability of many ecosystems to adapt naturally will be exceeded this
century. In addition, multiple barriers and constraints to effective
adaptation exist in human systems (see Topic 4.2). {SYR 4.2; WGII
17.4.2, 19.2, 19.4.1}
Unmitigated climate change would, in the long term, be likely
to exceed the capacity of natural, managed and human systems to
adapt. Reliance on adaptation alone could eventually lead to a magnitude of climate change to which effective adaptation is not possible, or will only be available at very high social, environmental
and economic costs. {WGII 18.1, SPM} Efforts to mitigate GHG emissions to reduce the rate and
magnitude of climate change need to account for inertia in
the climate and socio-economic systems. {SYR 3.2; WGI 10.3,
10.4, 10.7, SPM; WGIII 2.3.4}
After GHG concentrations are stabilised, the rate at which the
global average temperature increases is expected to slow within a
few decades. Small increases in global average temperature could
still be expected for several centuries. Sea level rise from thermal
expansion would continue for many centuries at a rate that eventually decreases from that reached before stabilisation, due to ongoing heat uptake by oceans. {SYR 3.2, WGI 10.3, 10.4, 10.7, SPM}
Delayed emission reductions significantly constrain the opportunities to achieve lower stabilisation levels and increase the risk
of more severe climate change impacts. Even though benefits of
mitigation measures in terms of avoided climate change would take
several decades to materialise, mitigation actions begun in the short
term would avoid locking in both long-lived carbon intensive infrastructure and development pathways, reduce the rate of climate
change and reduce the adaptation needs associated with higher levels of warming. {WGII 18.4, 20.6, 20.7, SPM; WGIII 2.3.4, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6,
SPM}


5.4 Emission trajectories for stabilisation
In order to stabilise the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere, emissions would need to peak and decline thereafter.28 The lower the stabilisation level, the more quickly this
peak and decline would need to occur (Figure 5.1).29 {WGIII
3.3, 3.5, SPM}
Advances in modelling since the TAR permit the assessment of
multi-gas mitigation strategies for exploring the attainability and
costs for achieving stabilisation of GHG concentrations. These
scenarios explore a wider range of future scenarios, including
lower levels of stabilisation, than reported in the TAR. {WGIII 3.3,
3.5, SPM}
Mitigation efforts over the next two to three decades will
have a large impact on opportunities to achieve lower
stabilisation levels (Table 5.1 and Figure 5.1). {WGIII 3.5,
SPM}
Table 5.1 summarises the required emission levels for different
groups of stabilisation concentrations and the resulting equilibrium global average temperature increases, using the ‘best estimate’ of
climate sensitivity (see Figure 5.1 for the likely range of uncertainty). Stabilisation at lower concentration and related equilibrium
temperature levels advances the date when emissions need to peak
and requires greater emissions reductions by 2050.30 Climate sensitivity is a key uncertainty for mitigation scenarios that aim to meet
specific temperature levels. The timing and level of mitigation to
reach a given temperature stabilisation level is earlier and more
stringent if climate sensitivity is high than if it is low. {WGIII 3.3,
3.4, 3.5, 3.6, SPM}
Sea level rise under warming is inevitable. Thermal expansion
would continue for many centuries after GHG concentrations have
stabilised, for any of the stabilisation levels assessed, causing an
eventual sea level rise much larger than projected for the 21st century (Table 5.1). If GHG and aerosol concentrations had been
stabilised at year 2000 levels, thermal expansion alone would be
expected to lead to further sea level rise of 0.3 to 0.8m. The eventual contributions from Greenland ice sheet loss could be several
metres, and larger than from thermal expansion, should warming in
excess of 1.9 to 4.6°C above pre-industrial be sustained over many
centuries. These long-term consequences would have major implications for world coastlines. The long time scale of thermal expansion and ice sheet response to warming imply that mitigation strategies that seek to stabilise GHG concentrations (or radiative forcing) at or above present levels do not stabilise sea level for many
centuries. {WG1 10.7}
Feedbacks between the carbon cycle and climate change affect
the required mitigation and adaptation response to climate change.
Climate-carbon cycle coupling is expected to increase the fraction
of anthropogenic emissions that remains in the atmosphere as the
climate system warms (see Topics 2.3 and 3.2.1), but mitigation
studies have not yet incorporated the full range of these feedbacks.
As a consequence, the emission reductions to meet a particular
stabilisation level reported in the mitigation studies assessed in Table
5.1 might be underestimated. Based on current understanding of
climate-carbon cycle feedbacks, model studies suggest that
stabilising CO2
 concentrations at, for example, 450ppm31 could require cumulative emissions over the 21st century to be less than
1800 [1370 to 2200] GtCO2
, which is about 27% less than the 2460
[2310 to 2600] GtCO2
 determined without consideration of carbon
cycle feedbacks. {SYR 2.3, 3.2.1; WGI 7.3, 10.4, SPM}

5.5 Technology flows and development
There is high agreement and much evidence that all
stabilisation levels assessed can be achieved by deployment of a portfolio of technologies that are either currently
available or expected to be commercialised in coming decades, assuming appropriate and effective incentives are
in place for development, acquisition, deployment and diffusion of technologies and addressing related barriers. {WGIII
SPM}
Worldwide deployment of low-GHG emission technologies as
well as technology improvements through public and private RD&D
would be required for achieving stabilisation targets as well as cost
reduction.32 Figure 5.2 gives illustrative examples of the contribution of the portfolio of mitigation options. The contribution of different technologies varies over time and region and depends on the
baseline development path, available technologies and relative costs,
and the analysed stabilisation levels. Stabilisation at the lower of
the assessed levels (490 to 540ppm CO2
-eq) requires early investments and substantially more rapid diffusion and commercialisation
of advanced low-emissions technologies over the next decades
(2000-2030) and higher contributions across abatement options in
the long term (2000-2100). This requires that barriers to development, acquisition, deployment and diffusion of technologies are
effectively addressed with appropriate incentives. {WGIII 2.7, 3.3,
3.4, 3.6, 4.3, 4.4, 4.6, SPM}
Without sustained investment flows and effective technology
transfer, it may be difficult to achieve emission reduction at a significant scale. Mobilising financing of incremental costs of lowcarbon technologies is important. {WGIII 13.3, SPM}
There are large uncertainties concerning the future contribution of different technologies. However, all assessed stabilisation
scenarios concur that 60 to 80% of the reductions over the course
of the century would come from energy supply and use and industrial processes. Including non-CO2
 and CO2
 land-use and forestry
mitigation options provides greater flexibility and cost-effectiveness. Energy efficiency plays a key role across many scenarios for
most regions and time scales. For lower stabilisation levels, scenarios put more emphasis on the use of low-carbon energy sources,
such as renewable energy, nuclear power and the use of CO2
 capture and storage (CCS). In these scenarios, improvements of carbon intensity of energy supply and the whole economy needs to be
much faster than in the past (Figure 5.2). {WGIII 3.3, 3.4, TS.3, SPM}


5.6 Costs of mitigation and long-term
stabilisation targets
The macro-economic costs of mitigation generally rise with
the stringency of the stabilisation target and are relatively
higher when derived from baseline scenarios characterised
by high emission levels. {WGIII SPM}
There is high agreement and medium evidence that in 2050 global average macro-economic costs for multi-gas mitigation towards
stabilisation between 710 and 445ppm CO2
-eq are between a 1%
gain to a 5.5% decrease of global GDP (Table 5.2). This corresponds to slowing average annual global GDP growth by less than
0.12 percentage points. Estimated GDP losses by 2030 are on average lower and show a smaller spread compared to 2050 (Table 5.2).
For specific countries and sectors, costs vary considerably from the
global average.33 {WGIII 3.3, 13.3, SPM}5.7 Costs, benefits and avoided climate
impacts at global and regional levels
Impacts of climate change will vary regionally. Aggregated
and discounted to the present, they are very likely to impose net annual costs, which will increase over time as global temperatures increase. {WGII SPM}
For increases in global average temperature of less than 1 to 3°C
above 1980-1999 levels, some impacts are projected to produce
market benefits in some places and sectors while, at the same time,
imposing costs in other places and sectors. Global mean losses could
be 1 to 5% of GDP for 4°C of warming, but regional losses could
be substantially higher. {WGII 9.ES, 10.6, 15.ES, 20.6, SPM}
Peer-reviewed estimates of the social cost of carbon (net economic costs of damages from climate change aggregated across the
globe and discounted to the present) for 2005 have an average value
of US$12 per tonne of CO2
, but the range from 100 estimates is
large (-$3 to $95/tCO2
). The range of published evidence indicates
that the net damage costs of climate change are projected to be
significant and to increase over time. {WGII 20.6, SPM}
It is very likely that globally aggregated figures underestimate
the damage costs because they cannot include many non-quantifiable impacts. It is virtually certain that aggregate estimates of costs
mask significant differences in impacts across sectors, regions, countries and populations. In some locations and amongst some groups
of people with high exposure, high sensitivity and/or low adaptive
capacity, net costs will be significantly larger than the global average. {WGII 7.4, 20.ES, 20.6, 20.ES, SPM}
Limited and early analytical results from integrated analyses of the global costs and benefits of mitigation indicate
that these are broadly comparable in magnitude, but do not
as yet permit an unambiguous determination of an emissions pathway or stabilisation level where benefits exceed
costs. {WGIII SPM}
Comparing the costs of mitigation with avoided damages would
require the reconciliation of welfare impacts on people living in
different places and at different points in time into a global aggregate measure of well-being. {WGII 18.ES}
Choices about the scale and timing of GHG mitigation involve
balancing the economic costs of more rapid emission reductions
now against the corresponding medium-term and long-term climate
risks of delay. {WGIII SPM}
Many impacts can be avoided, reduced or delayed by mitigation. {WGII SPM}
Although the small number of impact assessments that evaluate stabilisation scenarios do not take full account of uncertainties
in projected climate under stabilisation, they nevertheless provide
indications of damages avoided and risks reduced for different amounts of emissions reduction. The rate and magnitude of future
human-induced climate change and its associated impacts are determined by human choices defining alternative socio-economic
futures and mitigation actions that influence emission pathways.
Figure 3.2 demonstrates that alternative SRES emission pathways
could lead to substantial differences in climate change throughout
the 21st century. Some of the impacts at the high temperature end of
Figure 3.6 could be avoided by socio-economic development pathways that limit emissions and associated climate change towards
the lower end of the ranges illustrated in Figure 3.6. {SYR 3.2, 3.3;
WGIII 3.5, 3.6, SPM}
Figure 3.6 illustrates how reduced warming could reduce the
risk of, for example, affecting a significant number of ecosystems,
the risk of extinctions, and the likelihood that cereal productivity
in some regions would tend to fall. {SYR 3.3, Figure 3.6; WGII 4.4, 5.4,
Table 20.6}

5.8 Broader environmental and
sustainability issues
Sustainable development can reduce vulnerability to climate
change, and climate change could impede nations’ abilities
to achieve sustainable development pathways. {WGII SPM}
It is very likely that climate change can slow the pace of progress
toward sustainable development either directly through increased
exposure to adverse impacts or indirectly through erosion of the
capacity to adapt. Over the next half-century, climate change could
impede achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. {WGII
SPM}
Climate change will interact at all scales with other trends in
global environmental and natural resource concerns, including
water, soil and air pollution, health hazards, disaster risk, and deforestation. Their combined impacts may be compounded in future
in the absence of integrated mitigation and adaptation measures.
{WGII 20.3, 20.7, 20.8, SPM}
Making development more sustainable can enhance mitigative and adaptive capacities, reduce emissions, and reduce vulnerability, but there may be barriers to implementation. {WGII 20.8; WGIII 12.2, SPM}
Both adaptive and mitigative capacities can be enhanced through
sustainable development. Sustainable development can, thereby,
reduce vulnerability to climate change by reducing sensitivities
(through adaptation) and/or exposure (through mitigation). At
present, however, few plans for promoting sustainability have explicitly included either adapting to climate change impacts, or promoting adaptive capacity. Similarly, changing development paths
can make a major contribution to mitigation but may require resources to overcome multiple barriers. {WGII 20.3, 20.5, SPM; WGIII
2.1, 2.5, 12.1, SPM}


6.1 Observed changes in climate and their
effects, and their causes
Robust findings
Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of increases in global average air and ocean
temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice and rising global average sea level. {WGI 3.9, SPM}
Many natural systems, on all continents and in some oceans,
are being affected by regional climate changes. Observed changes
in many physical and biological systems are consistent with warming. As a result of the uptake of anthropogenic CO2
 since 1750, the
acidity of the surface ocean has increased. {WGI 5.4, WGII 1.3}
Global total annual anthropogenic GHG emissions, weighted
by their 100-year GWPs, have grown by 70% between 1970 and
2004. As a result of anthropogenic emissions, atmospheric concentrations of N2
O now far exceed pre-industrial values spanning many
thousands of years, and those of CH4
 and CO2
 now far exceed the
natural range over the last 650,000 years. {WGI SPM; WGIII 1.3}
Most of the global average warming over the past 50 years is
very likely due to anthropogenic GHG increases and it is likely that
there is a discernible human-induced warming averaged over each
continent (except Antarctica). {WGI 9.4, SPM}
Anthropogenic warming over the last three decades has likely
had a discernible influence at the global scale on observed changes
in many physical and biological systems. {WGII 1.4, SPM}
Key uncertainties
Climate data coverage remains limited in some regions and there
is a notable lack of geographic balance in data and literature on
observed changes in natural and managed systems, with marked
scarcity in developing countries. {WGI SPM; WGII 1.3, SPM}
Analysing and monitoring changes in extreme events, including drought, tropical cyclones, extreme temperatures and the frequency and intensity of precipitation, is more difficult than for climatic averages as longer data time-series of higher spatial and temporal resolutions are required. {WGI 3.8, SPM}
Effects of climate changes on human and some natural systems
are difficult to detect due to adaptation and non-climatic drivers.
{WGII 1.3}
Difficulties remain in reliably simulating and attributing observed temperature changes to natural or human causes at smaller
than continental scales. At these smaller scales, factors such as landuse change and pollution also complicate the detection of anthropogenic warming influence on physical and biological systems. {WGI
8.3, 9.4, SPM; WGII 1.4, SPM}
The magnitude of CO2
 emissions from land-use change and
CH4
 emissions from individual sources remain as key uncertainties. {WGI 2.3, 7.3, 7.4; WGIII 1.3, TS.14}
 
 
 6.2 Drivers and projections of future climate
changes and their impacts
Robust findings
With current climate change mitigation policies and related sustainable development practices, global GHG emissions will continue to grow over the next few decades. {WGIII 3.2, SPM}
For the next two decades a warming of about 0.2°C per decade
is projected for a range of SRES emissions scenarios. {WGI 10.3,
10.7, SPM}
Continued GHG emissions at or above current rates would cause
further warming and induce many changes in the global climate
system during the 21st century that would very likely be larger than
those observed during the 20th century. {WGI 10.3, 11.1, SPM}
The pattern of future warming where land warms more than the
adjacent oceans and more in northern high latitudes is seen in all
scenarios. {WGI 10.3, 11.1, SPM}
Warming tends to reduce terrestrial ecosystem and ocean uptake of atmospheric CO2
, increasing the fraction of anthropogenic
emissions that remains in the atmosphere. {WGI 7.3, 10.4, 10.5, SPM}
Anthropogenic warming and sea level rise would continue for
centuries even if GHG emissions were to be reduced sufficiently
for GHG concentrations to stabilise, due to the time scales associated with climate processes and feedbacks. {WGI 10.7, SPM}
Equilibrium climate sensitivity is very unlikely to be less than
1.5°C. {WGI 8.6, 9.6, Box 10.2, SPM}
Some systems, sectors and regions are likely to be especially
affected by climate change. The systems and sectors are some ecosystems (tundra, boreal forest, mountain, mediterranean-type, mangroves, salt marshes, coral reefs and the sea-ice biome), low-lying
coasts, water resources in some dry regions at mid-latitudes and in
the dry topics and in areas dependent on snow and ice melt, agriculture in low-latitude regions, and human health in areas with low
adaptive capacity. The regions are the Arctic, Africa, small islands
and Asian and African megadeltas. Within other regions, even those
with high incomes, some people, areas and activities can be particularly at risk. {WGII TS.4.5}
Impacts are very likely to increase due to increased frequencies
and intensities of some extreme weather events. Recent events have
demonstrated the vulnerability of some sectors and regions, including in developed countries, to heat waves, tropical cyclones, floods
and drought, providing stronger reasons for concern as compared
to the findings of the TAR. {WGII Table SPM.2, 19.3}
Key uncertainties
Uncertainty in the equilibrium climate sensitivity creates uncertainty in the expected warming for a given CO2
-eq stabilisation
scenario. Uncertainty in the carbon cycle feedback creates uncertainty in the emissions trajectory required to achieve a particular
stabilisation level. {WGI 7.3, 10.4, 10.5, SPM}
Models differ considerably in their estimates of the strength of
different feedbacks in the climate system, particularly cloud feedbacks, oceanic heat uptake and carbon cycle feedbacks, although
progress has been made in these areas. Also, the confidence in projections is higher for some variables (e.g. temperature) than for
others (e.g. precipitation), and it is higher for larger spatial scales
and longer time averaging periods. {WGI 7.3, 8.1-8.7, 9.6, 10.2, 10.7,
SPM; WGII 4.4}
Aerosol impacts on the magnitude of the temperature response,
on clouds and on precipitation remain uncertain. {WGI 2.9, 7.5, 9.2,
9.4, 9.5}
Future changes in the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheet mass,
particularly due to changes in ice flow, are a major source of uncertainty that could increase sea level rise projections. The uncertainty
in the penetration of the heat into the oceans also contributes to the
future sea level rise uncertainty. {WGI 4.6, 6.4, 10.3, 10.7, SPM}
Large-scale ocean circulation changes beyond the 21st century
cannot be reliably assessed because of uncertainties in the meltwater supply from the Greenland ice sheet and model response to the
warming. {WGI 6.4, 8.7, 10.3 }
Projections of climate change and its impacts beyond about 2050
are strongly scenario- and model-dependent, and improved projections
would require improved understanding of sources of uncertainty and
enhancements in systematic observation networks. {WGII TS.6}
Impacts research is hampered by uncertainties surrounding regional projections of climate change, particularly precipitation.
{WGII TS.6}
Understanding of low-probability/high-impact events and the
cumulative impacts of sequences of smaller events, which is required for risk-based approaches to decision-making, is generally
limited. {WGII 19.4, 20.2, 20.4, 20.9, TS.6}


6.3 Responses to climate change
Robust findings
Some planned adaptation (of human activities) is occurring now;
more extensive adaptation is required to reduce vulnerability to climate change. {WGII 17.ES, 20.5, Table 20.6, SPM}
Unmitigated climate change would, in the long term, be likely
to exceed the capacity of natural, managed and human systems to
adapt. {WGII 20.7, SPM}
A wide range of mitigation options is currently available or projected to be available by 2030 in all sectors. The economic mitigation potential, at costs that range from net negative up to US$100/
tCO2
-equivalent, is sufficient to offset the projected growth of global emissions or to reduce emissions to below current levels in 2030.
{WGIII 11.3, SPM}
Many impacts can be reduced, delayed or avoided by mitigation. Mitigation efforts and investments over the next two to three
decades will have a large impact on opportunities to achieve lower
stabilisation levels. Delayed emissions reductions significantly constrain the opportunities to achieve lower stabilisation levels and
increase the risk of more severe climate change impacts. {WGII SPM,
WGIII SPM}
The range of stabilisation levels for GHG concentrations that
have been assessed can be achieved by deployment of a portfolio
of technologies that are currently available and those that are expected to be commercialised in coming decades, provided that appropriate and effective incentives are in place and barriers are removed. In addition, further RD&D would be required to improve
the technical performance, reduce the costs and achieve social acceptability of new technologies. The lower the stabilisation levels,
the greater the need for investment in new technologies during the
next few decades. {WGIII 3.3, 3.4}
Making development more sustainable by changing development paths can make a major contribution to climate change mitigation and adaptation and to reducing vulnerability. {WGII 18.7, 20.3,
SPM; WGIII 13.2, SPM}
Decisions about macro-economic and other policies that seem
unrelated to climate change can significantly affect emissions. {WGIII
12.2}
Key uncertainties
Understanding of how development planners incorporate information about climate variability and change into their decisions
is limited. This limits the integrated assessment of vulnerability.
{WGII 18.8, 20.9}
The evolution and utilisation of adaptive and mitigative capacity depend on underlying socio-economic development pathways.
{WGII 17.3, 17.4, 18.6, 19.4, 20.9}
Barriers, limits and costs of adaptation are not fully understood,
partly because effective adaptation measures are highly dependent
on specific geographical and climate risk factors as well as institutional, political and financial constraints. {WGII SPM}
Estimates of mitigation costs and potentials depend on assumptions about future socio-economic growth, technological change
and consumption patterns. Uncertainty arises in particular from
assumptions regarding the drivers of technology diffusion and the
potential of long-term technology performance and cost improvements. Also little is known about the effects of changes in behaviour
and lifestyles. {WGIII 3.3, 3.4, 11.3}
The effects of non-climate policies on emissions are poorly
quantified. {WGIII 12.2}


