2.1 Observed Changes, Impacts and Attribution
Human activities, principally through emissions of greenhouse gases, have unequivocally caused global warming,
with global surface temperature reaching 1.1°C above 1850–1900 in 2011–2020. Global greenhouse gas emissions
have continued to increase over 2010–2019, with unequal historical and ongoing contributions arising from
unsustainable energy use, land use and land-use change, lifestyles and patterns of consumption and production
across regions, between and within countries, and between individuals (high confidence). Human-caused climate
change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region across the globe. This has led to
widespread adverse impacts on food and water security, human health and on economies and society and related
losses and damages63 to nature and people (high confidence). Vulnerable communities who have historically
contributed the least to current climate change are disproportionately affected (high confidence).

2.1.1. Observed Warming and its Causes
Global surface temperature was around 1.1°C above 1850–1900 in
2011–2020 (1.09 [0.95 to 1.20]°C) 64 , with larger increases
over land (1.59 [1.34 to 1.83]°C) than over the ocean
(0.88 [0.68 to 1.01]°C)65
. Observed warming is human-caused, with
warming from greenhouse gases (GHG), dominated by CO2 and
methane (CH4), partly masked by aerosol cooling (Figure 2.1).
Global surface temperature in the first two decades of the 21st century
(2001–2020) was 0.99 [0.84 to 1.10]°C higher than 1850–1900. Global
surface temperature has increased faster since 1970 than in any other
50-year period over at least the last 2000 years (high confidence). The
likely range of total human-caused global surface temperature increase
from 1850–1900 to 2010–201966 is 0.8°C to 1.3°C, with a best estimate
of 1.07°C. It is likely that well-mixed GHGs 67 contributed a warming
of 1.0°C to 2.0°C, and other human drivers (principally aerosols)
contributed a cooling of 0.0°C to 0.8°C, natural (solar and volcanic)
drivers changed global surface temperature by ±0.1°C and internal
variability changed it by ±0.2°C. {WGI SPM A.1, WGI SPM A.1.2,
WGI SPM A.1.3, WGI SPM A.2.2, WGI Figure SPM.2; SRCCL TS.2}
Observed increases in well-mixed GHG concentrations since around
1750 are unequivocally caused by GHG emissions from human activities.
Land and ocean sinks have taken up a near-constant proportion
(globally about 56% per year) of CO2 emissions from human activities over
the past six decades, with regional differences (high confidence). In 2019,
atmospheric CO2 concentrations reached 410 parts per million (ppm), CH 4
reached 1866 parts per billion (ppb) and nitrous oxide (N2O) reached 332 ppb68 .
Other major contributors to warming are tropospheric ozone (O 3 ) and
halogenated gases. Concentrations of CH 4 and N2 O have increased to
levels unprecedented in at least 800,000 years (very high confidence),
and there is high confidence that current CO 2 concentrations are
higher than at any time over at least the past two million years. Since
1750, increases in CO 2 (47%) and CH4 (156%) concentrations far
exceed – and increases in N2 O (23%) are similar to – the natural
multi-millennial changes between glacial and interglacial periods over at
least the past 800,000 years (very high confidence). The net cooling effect
which arises from anthropogenic aerosols peaked in the late 20th century
(high confidence). {WGI SPM A1.1, WGI SPM A1.3, WGI SPM A.2.1,
WGI Figure SPM.2, WGI TS 2.2, WGI 2ES, WGI Figure 6.1}
Average annual GHG emissions during 2010–2019 were higher
than in any previous decade, but the rate of growth between
2010 and 2019 (1.3% yr -1 ) was lower than that between 2000
and 2009 (2.1% yr -1
) 69
. Historical cumulative net CO 2 emissions from
1850 to 2019 were 2400 ±240 GtCO2. Of these, more than half (58%)
occurred between 1850 and 1989 [1400 ±195 GtCO 2], and about 42%
between 1990 and 2019 [1000 ±90 GtCO2]. Global net anthropogenic
GHG emissions have been estimated to be 59±6.6 GtCO 2 -eq in 2019,
about 12% (6.5 GtCO2 -eq) higher than in 2010 and 54% (21 GtCO2 -eq)
higher than in 1990. By 2019, the largest growth in gross emissions
occurred in CO2 from fossil fuels and industry (CO2-FFI) followed by
CH4, whereas the highest relative growth occurred in fluorinated
gases (F-gases), starting from low levels in 1990. (high confidence)
{WGIII SPM B1.1, WGIII SPM B.1.2, WGIII SPM B.1.3, WGIII Figure SPM.1,
WGIII Figure SPM.2}
Regional contributions to global human-caused GHG emissions
continue to differ widely. Historical contributions of CO2 emissions
vary substantially across regions in terms of total magnitude, but also
in terms of contributions to CO 2 -FFI (1650 ± 73 GtCO 2 -eq) and net
CO2 -LULUCF (760 ± 220 GtCO 2-eq) emissions (Figure 2.2). Variations
in regional and national per capita emissions partly reflect different
development stages, but they also vary widely at similar income
levels. Average per capita net anthropogenic GHG emissions in 2019
ranged from 2.6 tCO 2-eq to 19 tCO 2-eq across regions (Figure 2.2).
Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS)
have much lower per capita emissions (1.7 tCO2-eq and 4.6 tCO2-eq,
respectively) than the global average (6.9 tCO 2 -eq), excluding
CO2 -LULUCF. Around 48% of the global population in 2019 lives in countries
emitting on average more than 6 tCO 2-eq per capita, 35% of the global
population live in countries emitting more than 9 tCO2 -eq per capita70
(excluding CO2 -LULUCF) while another 41% live in countries emitting less
than 3 tCO 2 -eq per capita. A substantial share of the population in these
low-emitting countries lack access to modern energy services. (high confidence)
{WGIII SPM B.3, WGIII SPM B3.1, WGIII SPM B.3.2, WGIII SPM B.3.3}
Net GHG emissions have increased since 2010 across all major
sectors (high confidence). In 2019, approximately 34% (20 GtCO2 -eq)
of net global GHG emissions came from the energy sector, 24%
(14 GtCO 2 -eq) from industry, 22% (13 GtCO 2-eq) from AFOLU, 15%
(8.7 GtCO2-eq) from transport and 6% (3.3 GtCO 2-eq) from buildings71
(high confidence). Average annual GHG emissions growth between
2010 and 2019 slowed compared to the previous decade in energy
supply (from 2.3% to 1.0%) and industry (from 3.4% to 1.4%) but
remained roughly constant at about 2% yr –1 in the transport sector
(high confidence). About half of total net AFOLU emissions are from
CO2 LULUCF, predominantly from deforestation (medium confidence).
Land overall constituted a net sink of –6.6 (±4.6) GtCO 2 yr–1 for the period
2010–201972 (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM B.2, WGIII SPM B.2.1,
WGIII SPM B.2.2, WGIII TS 5.6.1}
Human-caused climate change is a consequence of more than
a century of net GHG emissions from energy use, land-use and
land use change, lifestyle and patterns of consumption, and
production. Emissions reductions in CO2 from fossil fuels and industrial
processes (CO2 -FFI), due to improvements in energy intensity of GDP
and carbon intensity of energy, have been less than emissions increases
from rising global activity levels in industry, energy supply, transport,
agriculture and buildings. The 10% of households with the highest per
capita emissions contribute 34–45% of global consumption-based
household GHG emissions, while the middle 40% contribute 40–53%,
and the bottom 50% contribute 13–15%. An increasing share of
emissions can be attributed to urban areas (a rise from about 62%
to 67–72% of the global share between 2015 and 2020). The drivers
of urban GHG emissions 73 are complex and include population size,
income, state of urbanisation and urban form. (high confidence)
{WGIII SPM B.2, WGIII SPM B.2.3, WGIII SPM B.3.4, WGIII SPM D.1.1}

2.1.2. Observed Climate System Changes and Impacts to
Date
It is unequivocal that human influence has warmed the
atmosphere, ocean and land. Widespread and rapid changes in
the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and biosphere have occurred
(Table 2.1). The scale of recent changes across the climate system as
a whole and the present state of many aspects of the climate system
are unprecedented over many centuries to many thousands of years. It
is very likely that GHG emissions were the main driver74 of tropospheric
warming and extremely likely that human-caused stratospheric ozone
depletion was the main driver of stratospheric cooling between 1979
and the mid-1990s. It is virtually certain that the global upper ocean
(0-700m) has warmed since the 1970s and extremely likely that
human influence is the main driver. Ocean warming accounted for
91% of the heating in the climate system, with land warming, ice loss
and atmospheric warming accounting for about 5%, 3% and 1%,
respectively (high confidence). Global mean sea level increased by 0.20
[0.15 to 0.25] m between 1901 and 2018. The average rate of sea level
rise was 1.3 [0.6 to 2.1]mm yr-1 between 1901 and 1971, increasing to
1.9 [0.8 to 2.9] mm yr-1 between 1971 and 2006, and further increasing
to 3.7 [3.2 to –4.2] mm yr -1 between 2006 and 2018 (high confidence).
Human influence was very likely the main driver of these increases
since at least 1971 (Figure 3.4). Human influence is very likely the main
driver of the global retreat of glaciers since the 1990s and the decrease
in Arctic sea ice area between 1979–1988 and 2010–2019. Human
influence has also very likely contributed to decreased Northern Hemisphere
spring snow cover and surface melting of the Greenland ice sheet. It is
virtually certain that human-caused CO2 emissions are the main driver
of current global acidification of the surface open ocean. {WGI SPM A.1,
WGI SPM A.1.3, WGI SPM A.1.5, WGI SPM A.1.6, WG1 SPM A1.7,
WGI SPM A.2, WG1.SPM A.4.2; SROCC SPM.A.1, SROCC SPM A.2}
Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and
climate extremes in every region across the globe. Evidence of observed
changes in extremes such as heatwaves, heavy precipitation, droughts,
and tropical cyclones, and, in particular, their attribution to human
influence, has strengthened since AR5 (Figure 2.3). It is virtually certain
that hot extremes (including heatwaves) have become more frequent and
more intense across most land regions since the 1950s (Figure 2.3), while cold
extremes (including cold waves) have become less frequent and less severe,
with high confidence that human-caused climate change is the main
driver of these changes. Marine heatwaves have approximately doubled
in frequency since the 1980s (high confidence), and human influence
has very likely contributed to most of them since at least 2006. The
frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation events have increased
since the 1950s over most land areas for which observational data
are sufficient for trend analysis (high confidence), and human-caused
climate change is likely the main driver (Figure 2.3). Human-caused
climate change has contributed to increases in agricultural and ecological
droughts in some regions due to increased land evapotranspiration
(medium confidence) (Figure 2.3). It is likely that the global proportion
of major (Category 3–5) tropical cyclone occurrence has increased over
the last four decades. {WGI SPM A.3, WGI SPM A3.1, WGI SPM A3.2;
WGI SPM A3.4; SRCCL SPM.A.2.2; SROCC SPM. A.2}
Climate change has caused substantial damages, and increasingly
irreversible75 losses, in terrestrial, freshwater, cryospheric and
coastal and open ocean ecosystems (high confidence). The extent
and magnitude of climate change impacts are larger than estimated
in previous assessments (high confidence). Approximately half of the
species assessed globally have shifted polewards or, on land, also to
higher elevations (very high confidence). Biological responses including
changes in geographic placement and shifting seasonal timing are often
not sufficient to cope with recent climate change (very high confidence).
Hundreds of local losses of species have been driven by increases in
the magnitude of heat extremes (high confidence) and mass mortality
events on land and in the ocean (very high confidence). Impacts on
some ecosystems are approaching irreversibility such as the impacts
of hydrological changes resulting from the retreat of glaciers, or the
changes in some mountain (medium confidence) and Arctic ecosystems
driven by permafrost thaw (high confidence). Impacts in ecosystems
from slow-onset processes such as ocean acidification, sea level rise
or regional decreases in precipitation have also been attributed to
human-caused climate change (high confidence). Climate change
has contributed to desertification and exacerbated land degradation,
particularly in low lying coastal areas, river deltas, drylands and in
permafrost areas (high confidence). Nearly 50% of coastal wetlands
have been lost over the last 100 years, as a result of the combined
effects of localised human pressures, sea level rise, warming
and extreme climate events (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.1.1,
WGII SPM B.1.2, WGII Figure SPM.2.A, WGII TS.B.1; SRCCL SPM A.1.5,
SRCCL SPM A.2, SRCCL SPM A.2.6, SRCCL Figure SPM.1; SROCC SPM A.6.1,
SROCC SPM, A.6.4, SROCC SPM A.7}
Climate change has reduced food security and affected water
security due to warming, changing precipitation patterns,
reduction and loss of cryospheric elements, and greater frequency
and intensity of climatic extremes, thereby hindering efforts to
meet Sustainable Development Goals (high confidence). Although
overall agricultural productivity has increased, climate change has slowed
this growth in agricultural productivity over the past 50 years globally
(medium confidence), with related negative crop yield impacts mainly
recorded in mid- and low latitude regions, and some positive impacts
in some high latitude regions (high confidence). Ocean warming in
the 20th century and beyond has contributed to an overall decrease
in maximum catch potential (medium confidence), compounding the
impacts from overfishing for some fish stocks (high confidence). Ocean
warming and ocean acidification have adversely affected food production
from shellfish aquaculture and fisheries in some oceanic regions (high
confidence). Current levels of global warming are associated with
moderate risks from increased dryland water scarcity (high confidence).
Roughly half of the world’s population currently experiences severe water
scarcity for at least some part of the year due to a combination of climatic
and non-climatic drivers (medium confidence) (Figure 2.3). Unsustainable
agricultural expansion, driven in part by unbalanced diets77
, increases
ecosystem and human vulnerability and leads to competition for land
and/or water resources (high confidence). Increasing weather and climate
extreme events have exposed millions of people to acute food insecurity78
and reduced water security, with the largest impacts observed in many
locations and/or communities in Africa, Asia, Central and South America,
LDCs, Small Islands and the Arctic, and for small-scale food producers,
low-income households and Indigenous Peoples globally (high confidence).
{WGII SPM B.1.3, WGII SPM.B.2.3, WGII Figure SPM.2, WGII TS B.2.3,
WGII TS Figure TS. 6; SRCCL SPM A.2.8, SRCCL SPM A.5.3; SROCC SPM A.5.4.,
SROCC SPM A.7.1, SROCC SPM A.8.1, SROCC Figure SPM.2}
In urban settings, climate change has caused adverse impacts on
human health, livelihoods and key infrastructure (high confidence).
Hot extremes including heatwaves have intensified in cities (high
confidence), where they have also worsened air pollution events
(medium confidence) and limited functioning of key infrastructure
(high confidence). Urban infrastructure, including transportation, water,
sanitation and energy systems have been compromised by extreme
and slow-onset events79
, with resulting economic losses, disruptions of
services and impacts to well-being (high confidence). Observed impacts
are concentrated amongst economically and socially marginalised urban
residents, e.g., those living in informal settlements (high confidence).
Cities intensify human-caused warming locally (very high confidence),
while urbanisation also increases mean and heavy precipitation over and/or
downwind of cities (medium confidence) and resulting runoff intensity
(high confidence). {WGI SPM C.2.6; WGII SPM B.1.5, WGII Figure TS.9,
WGII 6 ES}
Climate change has adversely affected human physical health globally
and mental health in assessed regions (very high confidence), and is
contributing to humanitarian crises where climate hazards interact
with high vulnerability (high confidence). In all regions increases in
extreme heat events have resulted in human mortality and morbidity
(very high confidence). The occurrence of climate-related food-borne and
water-borne diseases has increased (very high confidence). The incidence
of vector-borne diseases has increased from range expansion and/or
increased reproduction of disease vectors (high confidence). Animal and
human diseases, including zoonoses, are emerging in new areas (high
confidence). In assessed regions, some mental health challenges are
associated with increasing temperatures (high confidence), trauma from
extreme events (very high confidence), and loss of livelihoods and culture
(high confidence) (Figure 2.3). Climate change impacts on health are
mediated through natural and human systems, including economic
and social conditions and disruptions (high confidence). Climate and
weather extremes are increasingly driving displacement in Africa,
Asia, North America (high confidence), and Central and South America
(medium confidence) (Figure 2.3), with small island states in the
Caribbean and South Pacific being disproportionately affected relative
to their small population size (high confidence). Through displacement
and involuntary migration from extreme weather and climate
events, climate change has generated and perpetuated vulnerability
(medium confidence). {WGII SPM B.1.4, WGII SPM B.1.7}
Human influence has likely increased the chance of compound
extreme events80 since the 1950s. Concurrent and repeated climate
hazards have occurred in all regions, increasing impacts and
risks to health, ecosystems, infrastructure, livelihoods and food
(high confidence). Compound extreme events include increases in the
frequency of concurrent heatwaves and droughts (high confidence); fire
weather in some regions (medium confidence); and compound flooding in
some locations (medium confidence). Multiple risks interact, generating
new sources of vulnerability to climate hazards, and compounding
overall risk (high confidence). Compound climate hazards can overwhelm
adaptive capacity and substantially increase damage (high confidence)).
{WGI SPM A.3.5; WGII SPM. B.5.1, WGII TS.C.11.3}
Economic impacts attributable to climate change are increasingly
affecting peoples’ livelihoods and are causing economic and
societal impacts across national boundaries (high confidence).
Economic damages from climate change have been detected in
climate-exposed sectors, with regional effects to agriculture, forestry,
fishery, energy, and tourism, and through outdoor labour productivity
(high confidence) with some exceptions of positive impacts in regions
with low energy demand and comparative advantages in agricultural
markets and tourism (high confidence). Individual livelihoods have been
affected through changes in agricultural productivity, impacts on human
health and food security, destruction of homes and infrastructure, and loss
of property and income, with adverse effects on gender and social equity
(high confidence). Tropical cyclones have reduced economic growth in
the short-term (high confidence). Event attribution studies and physical
understanding indicate that human-caused climate change increases
heavy precipitation associated with tropical cyclones (high confidence).
Wildfires in many regions have affected built assets, economic activity,
and health (medium to high confidence). In cities and settlements, climate
impacts to key infrastructure are leading to losses and damages across water
and food systems, and affect economic activity, with impacts extending
beyond the area directly impacted by the climate hazard (high confidence).
{WGI SPM A.3.4; WGII SPM B.1.6, WGII SPM B.5.2, WGII SPM B.5.3}
Climate change has caused widespread adverse impacts
and related losses and damages to nature and people (high
confidence). Losses and damages are unequally distributed across
systems, regions and sectors (high confidence). Cultural losses, related
to tangible and intangible heritage, threaten adaptive capacity and may
result in irrevocable losses of sense of belonging, valued cultural practices,
identity and home, particularly for Indigenous Peoples and those more
directly reliant on the environment for subsistence (medium confidence).
For example, changes in snow cover, lake and river ice, and permafrost
in many Arctic regions, are harming the livelihoods and cultural identity
of Arctic residents including Indigenous populations (high confidence).
Infrastructure, including transportation, water, sanitation and energy
systems have been compromised by extreme and slow-onset events,
with resulting economic losses, disruptions of services and impacts
to well-being (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.1, WGII SPM B.1.2,
WGII SPM.B.1.5, WGII SPM C.3.5, WGII TS.B.1.6; SROCC SPM A.7.1}
Across sectors and regions, the most vulnerable people and
systems have been disproportionately affected by the impacts
of climate change (high confidence). LDCs and SIDS who have much
lower per capita emissions (1.7 tCO2-eq, 4.6 tCO2 -eq, respectively) than
the global average (6.9 tCO2-eq) excluding CO2-LULUCF, also have high
vulnerability to climatic hazards, with global hotspots of high human
vulnerability observed in West-, Central- and East Africa, South Asia,
Central and South America, SIDS and the Arctic (high confidence).
Regions and people with considerable development constraints have
high vulnerability to climatic hazards (high confidence). Vulnerability is
higher in locations with poverty, governance challenges and limited
access to basic services and resources, violent conflict and high levels
of climate-sensitive livelihoods (e.g., smallholder farmers, pastoralists,
fishing communities) (high confidence). Vulnerability at different spatial
levels is exacerbated by inequity and marginalisation linked to gender,
ethnicity, low income or combinations thereof (high confidence), especially
for many Indigenous Peoples and local communities (high confidence).
Approximately 3.3 to 3.6 billion people live in contexts that are highly
vulnerable to climate change (high confidence). Between 2010 and
2020, human mortality from floods, droughts and storms was 15 times
higher in highly vulnerable regions, compared to regions with very low
vulnerability (high confidence). In the Arctic and in some high mountain
regions, negative impacts of cryosphere change have been especially felt
among Indigenous Peoples (high confidence). Human and ecosystem
vulnerability are interdependent (high confidence). Vulnerability of
ecosystems and people to climate change differs substantially among and
within regions (very high confidence), driven by patterns of intersecting
socio-economic development, unsustainable ocean and land use,
inequity, marginalisation, historical and ongoing patterns of inequity
such as colonialism, and governance81 (high confidence). {WGII SPM B.1,
WGII SPM B.2, WGII SPM B.2.4; WGIII SPM B.3.1; SROCC SPM A.7.1,
SROCC SPM A.7.2}

2.2 Responses Undertaken to Date
International climate agreements, rising national ambitions for climate action, along with rising public awareness
are accelerating efforts to address climate change at multiple levels of governance. Mitigation policies have
contributed to a decrease in global energy and carbon intensity, with several countries achieving GHG emission
reductions for over a decade. Low-emission technologies are becoming more affordable, with many low or
zero emissions options now available for energy, buildings, transport, and industry. Adaptation planning and
implementation progress has generated multiple benefits, with effective adaptation options having the potential
to reduce climate risks and contribute to sustainable development. Global tracked finance for mitigation and
adaptation has seen an upward trend since AR5, but falls short of needs. (high confidence)

2.2.1. Global Policy Setting
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
Kyoto Protocol, and Paris Agreement are supporting rising levels of
national ambition and encouraging the development and implementation
of climate policies at multiple levels of governance (high confidence).
The Kyoto Protocol led to reduced emissions in some countries and
was instrumental in building national and international capacity
for GHG reporting, accounting and emissions markets (high
confidence). The Paris Agreement, adopted under the UNFCCC, with
near universal participation, has led to policy development and
target-setting at national and sub-national levels, particularly in
relation to mitigation but also for adaptation, as well as enhanced
transparency of climate action and support (medium confidence).
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), required under
the Paris Agreement, have required countries to articulate their
priorities and ambition with respect to climate action. {WGII 17.4,
WGII TS D.1.1; WGIII SPM B.5.1, WGIII SPM E.6}
Loss & Damage82 was formally recognized in 2013 through establishment
of the Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage (WIM),
and in 2015, Article 8 of the Paris Agreement provided a legal basis
for the WIM. There is improved understanding of both economic and
non-economic losses and damages, which is informing international
climate policy and which has highlighted that losses and damages are
not comprehensively addressed by current financial, governance and
institutional arrangements, particularly in vulnerable developing countries
(high confidence). {WGII SPM C.3.5, WGII Cross-Chapter Box LOSS}
Other recent global agreements that influence responses to climate
change include the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
(2015-2030), the finance-oriented Addis Ababa Action Agenda (2015)
and the New Urban Agenda (2016), and the Kigali Amendment to
the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer
(2016), among others. In addition, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, adopted in 2015 by UN member states, sets out 17
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and seeks to align efforts
globally to prioritise ending extreme poverty, protect the planet and
promote more peaceful, prosperous and inclusive societies. If achieved,
these agreements would reduce climate change, and the impacts on
health, well-being, migration, and conflict, among others (very high
confidence). {WGII TS.A.1, WGII 7 ES}
Since AR5, rising public awareness and an increasing diversity
of actors, have overall helped accelerate political commitment
and global efforts to address climate change (medium confidence). Mass social movements have emerged as catalysing
agents in some regions, often building on prior movements including
Indigenous Peoples-led movements, youth movements, human
rights movements, gender activism, and climate litigation, which is
raising awareness and, in some cases, has influenced the outcome
and ambition of climate governance (medium confidence). Engaging
Indigenous Peoples and local communities using just-transition and
rights-based decision-making approaches, implemented through
collective and participatory decision-making processes has enabled
deeper ambition and accelerated action in different ways, and at all
scales, depending on national circumstances (medium confidence).
The media helps shape the public discourse about climate change. This
can usefully build public support to accelerate climate action (medium
evidence, high agreement). In some instances, public discourses of
media and organised counter movements have impeded climate
action, exacerbating helplessness and disinformation and fuelling
polarisation, with negative implications for climate action (medium
confidence). {WGII SPM C.5.1, WGII SPM D.2, WGII TS.D.9, WGII TS.D.9.7,
WGII TS.E.2.1, WGII 18.4; WGIII SPM D.3.3, WGIII SPM E.3.3, WGIII TS.6.1,
WGIII 6.7, WGIII 13 ES, WGIII Box.13.7}

2.2.2. Mitigation Actions to Date
There has been a consistent expansion of policies and laws
addressing mitigation since AR5 (high confidence). Climate
governance supports mitigation by providing frameworks through
which diverse actors interact, and a basis for policy development and
implementation (medium confidence). Many regulatory and economic
instruments have already been deployed successfully (high confidence).
By 2020, laws primarily focussed on reducing GHG emissions existed in
56 countries covering 53% of global emissions (medium confidence).
The application of diverse policy instruments for mitigation at the
national and sub-national levels has grown consistently across a
range of sectors (high confidence). Policy coverage is uneven across
sectors and remains limited for emissions from agriculture, and from
industrial materials and feedstocks (high confidence). {WGIII SPM B.5,
WGIII SPM B.5.2, WGIII SPM E.3, WGIII SPM E.4}
Practical experience has informed economic instrument design
and helped to improve predictability, environmental effectiveness,
economic efficiency, alignment with distributional goals, and social
acceptance (high confidence). Low-emission technological innovation
is strengthened through the combination of technology-push policies,
together with policies that create incentives for behaviour change and
market opportunities (high confidence) (Section 4.8.3). Comprehensive
and consistent policy packages have been found to be more effective
than single policies (high confidence). Combining mitigation with
policies to shift development pathways, policies that induce lifestyle or
behaviour changes, for example, measures promoting walkable urban
areas combined with electrification and renewable energy can create
health co-benefits from cleaner air and enhanced active mobility (high
confidence). Climate governance enables mitigation by providing an
overall direction, setting targets, mainstreaming climate action across
policy domains and levels, based on national circumstances and in the
context of international cooperation. Effective governance enhances
regulatory certainty, creating specialised organisations and creating the
context to mobilise finance (medium confidence). These functions can
be promoted by climate-relevant laws, which are growing in number, or
climate strategies, among others, based on national and sub-national
context (medium confidence). Effective and equitable climate
governance builds on engagement with civil society actors, political
actors, businesses, youth, labour, media, Indigenous Peoples and local
communities (medium confidence). {WGIII SPM E.2.2, WGIII SPM E.3,
WGIII SPM E.3.1, WGIII SPM E.4.2, WGIII SPM E.4.3, WGIII SPM E.4.4}
The unit costs of several low-emission technologies, including
solar, wind and lithium-ion batteries, have fallen consistently
since 2010 (Figure 2.4). Design and process innovations in
combination with the use of digital technologies have led to
near-commercial availability of many low or zero emissions
options in buildings, transport and industry. From 2010-2019,
there have been sustained decreases in the unit costs of solar energy
(by 85%), wind energy (by 55%), and lithium-ion batteries (by 85%),
and large increases in their deployment, e.g., >10× for solar and >100× for
electric vehicles (EVs), albeit varying widely across regions (Figure 2.4).
Electricity from PV and wind is now cheaper than electricity from
fossil sources in many regions, electric vehicles are increasingly
competitive with internal combustion engines, and large-scale
battery storage on electricity grids is increasingly viable. In
comparison to modular small-unit size technologies, the empirical
record shows that multiple large-scale mitigation technologies, with
fewer opportunities for learning, have seen minimal cost reductions
and their adoption has grown slowly. Maintaining emission-intensive
systems may, in some regions and sectors, be more expensive than
transitioning to low emission systems. (high confidence) {WGIII SPM B.4,
WGIII SPM B.4.1, WGIII SPM C.4.2, WGIII SPM C.5.2, WGIII SPM C.7.2,
WGIII SPM C.8, WGIII Figure SPM.3, WGIII Figure SPM.3}
For almost all basic materials – primary metals, building materials and
chemicals – many low- to zero-GHG intensity production processes are
at the pilot to near-commercial and in some cases commercial stage
but they are not yet established industrial practice. Integrated design
in construction and retrofit of buildings has led to increasing examples
of zero energy or zero carbon buildings. Technological innovation
made possible the widespread adoption of LED lighting. Digital
technologies including sensors, the internet of things, robotics, and
artificial intelligence can improve energy management in all sectors;
they can increase energy efficiency, and promote the adoption of many
low-emission technologies, including decentralised renewable energy,
while creating economic opportunities. However, some of these climate
change mitigation gains can be reduced or counterbalanced by growth in
demand for goods and services due to the use of digital devices. Several
mitigation options, notably solar energy, wind energy, electrification of
urban systems, urban green infrastructure, energy efficiency, demand
side management, improved forest- and crop/grassland management,
and reduced food waste and loss, are technically viable, are becoming
increasingly cost effective and are generally supported by the public, and
this enables expanded deployment in many regions. (high confidence)
{WGIII SPM B.4.3, WGIII SPM C.5.2, WGIII SPM C.7.2, WGIII SPM E.1.1,
WGIII TS.6.5}
The magnitude of global climate finance flows has increased
and financing channels have broadened (high confidence).
Annual tracked total financial flows for climate mitigation and
adaptation increased by up to 60% between 2013/14 and 2019/20,
but average growth has slowed since 2018 (medium confidence) and
most climate finance stays within national borders (high confidence).
Markets for green bonds, environmental, social and governance and
sustainable finance products have expanded significantly since AR5
(high confidence). Investors, central banks, and financial regulators are
driving increased awareness of climate risk to support climate policy
development and implementation (high confidence). Accelerated
international financial cooperation is a critical enabler of low-GHG and
just transitions (high confidence). {WGIII SPM B.5.4, WGIII SPM E.5,
WGIII TS.6.3, WGIII TS.6.4}
Economic instruments have been effective in reducing emissions,
complemented by regulatory instruments mainly at the national
and also sub-national and regional level (high confidence). By 2020,
over 20% of global GHG emissions were covered by carbon taxes or
emissions trading systems, although coverage and prices have been
insufficient to achieve deep reductions (medium confidence). Equity and
distributional impacts of carbon pricing instruments can be addressed
by using revenue from carbon taxes or emissions trading to support
low-income households, among other approaches (high confidence).
The mix of policy instruments which reduced costs and stimulated
adoption of solar energy, wind energy and lithium-ion batteries
includes public R&D, funding for demonstration and pilot projects, and
demand-pull instruments such as deployment subsidies to attain scale
(high confidence) (Figure 2.4). {WGIII SPM B.4.1, WGIII SPM B.5.2,
WGIII SPM E.4.2, WG III TS.3}
Mitigation actions, supported by policies, have contributed
to a decrease in global energy and carbon intensity between
2010 and 2019, with a growing number of countries achieving
absolute GHG emission reductions for more than a decade (high
confidence). While global net GHG emissions have increased since
2010, global energy intensity (total primary energy per unit GDP)
decreased by 2% yr –1 between 2010 and 2019. Global carbon
intensity (CO2 -FFI per unit primary energy) also decreased by 0.3%
yr –1
, mainly due to fuel switching from coal to gas, reduced expansion
of coal capacity, and increased use of renewables, and with large
regional variations over the same period. In many countries, policies
have enhanced energy efficiency, reduced rates of deforestation and
accelerated technology deployment, leading to avoided and in some
cases reduced or removed emissions (high confidence). At least
18 countries have sustained production-based CO2 and GHG and
consumption-based CO2 absolute emission reductions for longer than
10 years since 2005 through energy supply decarbonization, energy
efficiency gains, and energy demand reduction, which resulted from
both policies and changes in economic structure (high confidence).
Some countries have reduced production-based GHG emissions by a
third or more since peaking, and some have achieved reduction rates
of around 4% yr–1 for several years consecutively (high confidence).
Multiple lines of evidence suggest that mitigation policies have led to
avoided global emissions of several GtCO 2-eq yr–1 (medium confidence).
At least 1.8 GtCO2-eq yr–1 of avoided emissions can be accounted for
by aggregating separate estimates for the effects of economic and
regulatory instruments (medium confidence). Growing numbers of
laws and executive orders have impacted global emissions and are
estimated to have resulted in 5.9 GtCO2 -eq yr–1 of avoided emissions
in 2016 (medium confidence). These reductions have only partly offset
global emissions growth (high confidence). {WGIII SPM B.1,
WGIII SPM B.2.4, WGIII SPM B.3.5, WGIII SPM B.5.1, WGIII SPM B.5.3,
WGIII 1.3.2, WGIII 2.2.3}

2.2.3. Adaptation Actions to Date
Progress in adaptation planning and implementation has been
observed across all sectors and regions, generating multiple
benefits (very high confidence). The ambition, scope and progress
on adaptation have risen among governments at the local, national and
international levels, along with businesses, communities and civil society
(high confidence). Various tools, measures and processes are available
that can enable, accelerate and sustain adaptation implementation
(high confidence). Growing public and political awareness of climate
impacts and risks has resulted in at least 170 countries and many cities
including adaptation in their climate policies and planning processes
(high confidence). Decision support tools and climate services are
increasingly being used (very high confidence) and pilot projects and
local experiments are being implemented in different sectors (high
confidence). {WGII SPM C.1, WGII SPM.C.1.1, WGII TS.D.1.3, WGII TS.D.10}
Adaptation to water-related risks and impacts make up the majority (~60%)
of all documented83 adaptation (high confidence). A large number of
these adaptation responses are in the agriculture sector and these
include on-farm water management, water storage, soil moisture
conservation, and irrigation. Other adaptations in agriculture include
cultivar improvements, agroforestry, community-based adaptation and
farm and landscape diversification among others (high confidence).
For inland flooding, combinations of non-structural measures like
early warning systems, enhancing natural water retention such as by
restoring wetlands and rivers, and land use planning such as no build
zones or upstream forest management, can reduce flood risk (medium
confidence). Some land-related adaptation actions such as sustainable
food production, improved and sustainable forest management,
soil organic carbon management, ecosystem conservation and land
restoration, reduced deforestation and degradation, and reduced
food loss and waste are being undertaken, and can have mitigation
co-benefits (high confidence). Adaptation actions that increase the
resilience of biodiversity and ecosystem services to climate change
include responses like minimising additional stresses or disturbances,
reducing fragmentation, increasing natural habitat extent, connectivity
and heterogeneity, and protecting small-scale refugia where
microclimate conditions can allow species to persist (high confidence).
Most innovations in urban adaptation have occurred through advances
in disaster risk management, social safety nets and green/blue
infrastructure (medium confidence). Many adaptation measures that
benefit health and well-being are found in other sectors (e.g., food,
livelihoods, social protection, water and sanitation, infrastructure)
(high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.2.2, WGII TS.D.1.2,
WGII TS.D.1.4, WGII TS.D.4.2, WGII TS.D.8.3, WGII 4 ES; SRCCL SPM B.1.1}
Adaptation can generate multiple additional benefits such as improving
agricultural productivity, innovation, health and well-being, food
security, livelihood, and biodiversity conservation as well as reduction
of risks and damages (very high confidence). {WGII SPM C1.1}
Globally tracked adaptation finance has shown an upward trend
since AR5, but represents only a small portion of total climate
finance, is uneven and has developed heterogeneously across
regions and sectors (high confidence). Adaptation finance has come
predominantly from public sources, largely through grants, concessional
and non-concessional instruments (very high confidence). Globally,
private-sector financing of adaptation from a variety of sources such
as commercial financial institutions, institutional investors, other
private equity, non-financial corporations, as well as communities
and households has been limited, especially in developing countries
(high confidence). Public mechanisms and finance can leverage
private sector finance for adaptation by addressing real and perceived
regulatory, cost and market barriers, for example via public-private
partnerships (high confidence). Innovations in adaptation and
resilience finance, such as forecast-based/anticipatory financing
systems and regional risk insurance pools, have been piloted and are
growing in scale (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.3.2, WGII SPM C.5.4;
WGII TS.D.1.6, WGII Cross-Chapter Box FINANCE; WGIII SPM E.5.4}
There are adaptation options which are effective84 in reducing
climate risks 85 for specific contexts, sectors and regions and
contribute positively to sustainable development and other
societal goals. In the agriculture sector, cultivar improvements,
on-farm water management and storage, soil moisture conservation,
irrigation 86 , agroforestry, community-based adaptation, and farm and
landscape level diversification, and sustainable land management
approaches, provide multiple benefits and reduce climate risks.
Reduction of food loss and waste, and adaptation measures in support
of balanced diets contribute to nutrition, health, and biodiversity benefits.
(high confidence) {WGII SPM C.2, WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.2.2;
SRCCL B.2, SRCCL SPM C.2.1}
Ecosystem-based Adaptation 87 approaches such as urban greening,
restoration of wetlands and upstream forest ecosystems reduce
a range of climate change risks, including flood risks, urban heat
and provide multiple co-benefits. Some land-based adaptation
options provide immediate benefits (e.g., conservation of peatlands,
wetlands, rangelands, mangroves and forests); while afforestation and
reforestation, restoration of high-carbon ecosystems, agroforestry, and
the reclamation of degraded soils take more time to deliver measurable
results. Significant synergies exist between adaptation and mitigation,
for example through sustainable land management approaches.
Agroecological principles and practices and other approaches
that work with natural processes support food security, nutrition,
health and well-being, livelihoods and biodiversity, sustainability and
ecosystem services. (high confidence) {WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.2.2,
WGII SPM C.2.5, WGII TS.D.4.1; SRCCL SPM B.1.2, SRCCL SPM.B.6.1;
SROCC SPM C.2}
Combinations of non-structural measures like early warning systems
and structural measures like levees have reduced loss of lives in case
of inland flooding (medium confidence) and early warning systems
along with flood-proofing of buildings have proven to be cost-effective
in the context of coastal flooding under current sea level rise (high
confidence). Heat Health Action Plans that include early warning and
response systems are effective adaptation options for extreme heat
(high confidence). Effective adaptation options for water, food and
vector-borne diseases include improving access to potable water,
reducing exposure of water and sanitation systems to extreme weather
events, and improved early warning systems, surveillance, and vaccine
development (very high confidence). Adaptation options such as
disaster risk management, early warning systems, climate services
and social safety nets have broad applicability across multiple sectors
(high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2.1, WGII SPM C.2.5, WGII SPM C.2.9,
WGII SPM C.2.11, WGII SPM C.2.13; SROCC SPM C.3.2}
Integrated, multi-sectoral solutions that address social inequities,
differentiate responses based on climate risk and cut across systems,
increase the feasibility and effectiveness of adaptation in multiple
sectors (high confidence). {WGII SPM C.2}
