1. Observed changes in climate and
their effects
Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is
now evident from observations of increases in global
average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice and rising global average sea level
(Figure SPM.1). {1.1}
Eleven of the last twelve years (1995-2006) rank among
the twelve warmest years in the instrumental record of global
surface temperature (since 1850). The 100-year linear trend
(1906-2005) of 0.74 [0.56 to 0.92]°C1 is larger than the corresponding trend of 0.6 [0.4 to 0.8]°C (1901-2000) given in
the Third Assessment Report (TAR) (Figure SPM.1). The temperature increase is widespread over the globe and is greater
at higher northern latitudes. Land regions have warmed faster
than the oceans (Figures SPM.2, SPM.4). {1.1, 1.2}
Rising sea level is consistent with warming (Figure
SPM.1). Global average sea level has risen since 1961 at an
average rate of 1.8 [1.3 to 2.3] mm/yr and since 1993 at 3.1
[2.4 to 3.8] mm/yr, with contributions from thermal expansion, melting glaciers and ice caps, and the polar ice sheets.
Whether the faster rate for 1993 to 2003 reflects decadal variation or an increase in the longer-term trend is unclear. {1.1}
Observed decreases in snow and ice extent are also consistent with warming (Figure SPM.1). Satellite data since 1978
show that annual average Arctic sea ice extent has shrunk by
2.7 [2.1 to 3.3]% per decade, with larger decreases in summer
of 7.4 [5.0 to 9.8]% per decade. Mountain glaciers and snow
cover on average have declined in both hemispheres. {1.1}
From 1900 to 2005, precipitation increased significantly
in eastern parts of North and South America, northern Europe
and northern and central Asia but declined in the Sahel, the
Mediterranean, southern Africa and parts of southern Asia.
Globally, the area affected by drought has likely2 increased
since the 1970s. {1.1}
It is very likely that over the past 50 years: cold days, cold
nights and frosts have become less frequent over most land
areas, and hot days and hot nights have become more frequent.
It is likely that: heat waves have become more frequent over
most land areas, the frequency of heavy precipitation events
has increased over most areas, and since 1975 the incidence
of extreme high sea level3 has increased worldwide. {1.1}
There is observational evidence of an increase in intense
tropical cyclone activity in the North Atlantic since about 1970,
with limited evidence of increases elsewhere. There is no clear
trend in the annual numbers of tropical cyclones. It is difficult
to ascertain longer-term trends in cyclone activity, particularly
prior to 1970. {1.1}
Average Northern Hemisphere temperatures during the
second half of the 20th century were very likely higher than
during any other 50-year period in the last 500 years and likely
the highest in at least the past 1300 years. {1.1}
Observational evidence4 from all continents and most
oceans shows that many natural systems are being
affected by regional climate changes, particularly temperature increases. {1.2}
Changes in snow, ice and frozen ground have with high confidence increased the number and size of glacial lakes, increased
ground instability in mountain and other permafrost regions and
led to changes in some Arctic and Antarctic ecosystems. {1.2}
There is high confidence that some hydrological systems
have also been affected through increased runoff and earlier
spring peak discharge in many glacier- and snow-fed rivers
and through effects on thermal structure and water quality of
warming rivers and lakes. {1.2}
In terrestrial ecosystems, earlier timing of spring events
and poleward and upward shifts in plant and animal ranges
are with very high confidence linked to recent warming. In
some marine and freshwater systems, shifts in ranges and
changes in algal, plankton and fish abundance are with high
confidence associated with rising water temperatures, as well
as related changes in ice cover, salinity, oxygen levels and
circulation. {1.2}
Of the more than 29,000 observational data series, from
75 studies, that show significant change in many physical and
biological systems, more than 89% are consistent with the
direction of change expected as a response to warming (Fig
ure SPM.2). However, there is a notable lack of geographic
balance in data and literature on observed changes, with
marked scarcity in developing countries. {1.2, 1.3}
There is medium confidence that other effects of regional climate change on natural and human environments are emerging, although many are difficult to discern due to adaptation and non-climatic drivers. {1.2}
They include effects of temperature increases on: {1.2}
 agricultural and forestry management at Northern Hemisphere higher latitudes, such as earlier spring planting of
crops, and alterations in disturbance regimes of forests
due to fires and pests
 some aspects of human health, such as heat-related mortality in Europe, changes in infectious disease vectors in
some areas, and allergenic pollen in Northern Hemisphere
high and mid-latitudes
 some human activities in the Arctic (e.g. hunting and travel
over snow and ice) and in lower-elevation alpine areas
(such as mountain sports).

2. Causes of change
Changes in atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) and aerosols, land cover and solar radiation alter the energy balance of the climate system. {2.2}
Global GHG emissions due to human activities have
grown since pre-industrial times, with an increase of
70% between 1970 and 2004 (Figure SPM.3).5 {2.1}
Carbon dioxide (CO2
) is the most important anthropogenic
GHG. Its annual emissions grew by about 80% between 1970
and 2004. The long-term trend of declining CO2
 emissions
per unit of energy supplied reversed after 2000. {2.1}
Global atmospheric concentrations of CO2
, methane
(CH4
) and nitrous oxide (N2
O) have increased markedly
as a result of human activities since 1750 and now far
exceed pre-industrial values determined from ice cores
spanning many thousands of years. {2.2}
Atmospheric concentrations of CO2
 (379ppm) and CH4
(1774ppb) in 2005 exceed by far the natural range over the
last 650,000 years. Global increases in CO2
 concentrations
are due primarily to fossil fuel use, with land-use change providing another significant but smaller contribution. It is very
likely that the observed increase in CH4
 concentration is predominantly due to agriculture and fossil fuel use. CH4
 growth
rates have declined since the early 1990s, consistent with total emissions (sum of anthropogenic and natural sources) being nearly constant during this period. The increase in N2
O
concentration is primarily due to agriculture. {2.2}
There is very high confidence that the net effect of human
activities since 1750 has been one of warming.6 {2.2}
Most of the observed increase in global average temperatures since the mid-20th century is very likely due to the
observed increase in anthropogenic GHG concentrations.7 It is likely that there has been significant anthropogenic warming over the past 50 years averaged over
each continent (except Antarctica) (Figure SPM.4). {2.4}
During the past 50 years, the sum of solar and volcanic
forcings would likely have produced cooling. Observed patterns of warming and their changes are simulated only by
models that include anthropogenic forcings. Difficulties remain in simulating and attributing observed temperature
changes at smaller than continental scales. {2.4}
Advances since the TAR show that discernible human
influences extend beyond average temperature to other
aspects of climate. {2.4}
Human influences have: {2.4}
 very likely contributed to sea level rise during the latter
half of the 20th century
 likely contributed to changes in wind patterns, affecting
extra-tropical storm tracks and temperature patterns
 likely increased temperatures of extreme hot nights, cold
nights and cold days
 more likely than not increased risk of heat waves, area
affected by drought since the 1970s and frequency of heavy
precipitation events.
Anthropogenic warming over the last three decades has likely
had a discernible influence at the global scale on observed
changes in many physical and biological systems. {2.4}
Spatial agreement between regions of significant warming across the globe and locations of significant observed
changes in many systems consistent with warming is very
unlikely to be due solely to natural variability. Several modelling studies have linked some specific responses in physical
and biological systems to anthropogenic warming. {2.4}
More complete attribution of observed natural system responses to anthropogenic warming is currently prevented by
the short time scales of many impact studies, greater natural
climate variability at regional scales, contributions of nonclimate factors and limited spatial coverage of studies. {2.4}


3. Projected climate change
and its impacts
There is high agreement and much evidence that with
current climate change mitigation policies and related sustainable development practices, global GHG emissions
will continue to grow over the next few decades. {3.1}
The IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES,
2000) projects an increase of global GHG emissions by 25 to
90% (CO2
-eq) between 2000 and 2030 (Figure SPM.5), with
fossil fuels maintaining their dominant position in the global energy mix to 2030 and beyond. More recent scenarios without
additional emissions mitigation are comparable in range.8,9 {3.1}
Continued GHG emissions at or above current rates
would cause further warming and induce many changes
in the global climate system during the 21st century that
would very likely be larger than those observed during
the 20th century (Table SPM.1, Figure SPM.5). {3.2.1}
For the next two decades a warming of about 0.2°C per decade is projected for a range of SRES emissions scenarios. Even
if the concentrations of all GHGs and aerosols had been kept
constant at year 2000 levels, a further warming of about 0.1°C
per decade would be expected. Afterwards, temperature projections increasingly depend on specific emissions scenarios. {3.2}
The range of projections (Table SPM.1) is broadly consistent with the TAR, but uncertainties and upper ranges for
temperature are larger mainly because the broader range of
available models suggests stronger climate-carbon cycle feedbacks. Warming reduces terrestrial and ocean uptake of atmospheric CO2
, increasing the fraction of anthropogenic emissions remaining in the atmosphere. The strength of this feedback effect varies markedly among models. {2.3, 3.2.1}
Because understanding of some important effects driving
sea level rise is too limited, this report does not assess the
likelihood, nor provide a best estimate or an upper bound for
sea level rise. Table SPM.1 shows model-based projections
of global average sea level rise for 2090-2099.10 The projections do not include uncertainties in climate-carbon cycle feedbacks nor the full effects of changes in ice sheet flow, therefore the upper values of the ranges are not to be considered
upper bounds for sea level rise. They include a contribution
from increased Greenland and Antarctic ice flow at the rates
observed for 1993-2003, but this could increase or decrease
in the future.11 {3.2.1}
There is now higher confidence than in the TAR in projected patterns of warming and other regional-scale
features, including changes in wind patterns, precipitation and some aspects of extremes and sea ice. {3.2.2}
Regional-scale changes include: {3.2.2}
 warming greatest over land and at most high northern latitudes and least over Southern Ocean and parts of the North
Atlantic Ocean, continuing recent observed trends (Figure SPM.6)
 contraction of snow cover area, increases in thaw depth
over most permafrost regions and decrease in sea ice extent; in some projections using SRES scenarios, Arctic
late-summer sea ice disappears almost entirely by the latter part of the 21st century
 very likely increase in frequency of hot extremes, heat
waves and heavy precipitation
 likely increase in tropical cyclone intensity; less confidence
in global decrease of tropical cyclone numbers
 poleward shift of extra-tropical storm tracks with consequent changes in wind, precipitation and temperature patterns
 very likely precipitation increases in high latitudes and
likely decreases in most subtropical land regions, continuing observed recent trends.
There is high confidence that by mid-century, annual river
runoff and water availability are projected to increase at high
latitudes (and in some tropical wet areas) and decrease in some
dry regions in the mid-latitudes and tropics. There is also high
confidence that many semi-arid areas (e.g. Mediterranean
Basin, western United States, southern Africa and
north-eastern Brazil) will suffer a decrease in water resources
due to climate change. {3.3.1, Figure 3.5}
Studies since the TAR have enabled more systematic
understanding of the timing and magnitude of impacts
related to differing amounts and rates of climate
change. {3.3.1, 3.3.2}
Figure SPM.7 presents examples of this new information
for systems and sectors. The top panel shows impacts increasing with increasing temperature change. Their estimated magnitude and timing is also affected by development pathway
(lower panel). {3.3.1}
Examples of some projected impacts for different regions
are given in Table SPM.2.
Some systems, sectors and regions are likely to be especially affected by climate change.12 {3.3.3}
Systems and sectors: {3.3.3}
 particular ecosystems:
- terrestrial: tundra, boreal forest and mountain regions
because of sensitivity to warming; mediterranean-type
ecosystems because of reduction in rainfall; and tropical rainforests where precipitation declines
- coastal: mangroves and salt marshes, due to multiple
stresses
- marine: coral reefs due to multiple stresses; the sea ice
biome because of sensitivity to warming
 water resources in some dry regions at mid-latitudes13 and
in the dry tropics, due to changes in rainfall and evapotranspiration, and in areas dependent on snow and ice melt
 agriculture in low latitudes, due to reduced water availability
 low-lying coastal systems, due to threat of sea level rise
and increased risk from extreme weather events
 human health in populations with low adaptive capacity.
Regions: {3.3.3}
 the Arctic, because of the impacts of high rates of projected
warming on natural systems and human communities
 Africa, because of low adaptive capacity and projected
climate change impacts
 small islands, where there is high exposure of population
and infrastructure to projected climate change impacts
 Asian and African megadeltas, due to large populations
and high exposure to sea level rise, storm surges and river
flooding.
Within other areas, even those with high incomes, some
people (such as the poor, young children and the elderly) can
be particularly at risk, and also some areas and some activities. {3.3.3}
Ocean acidification
The uptake of anthropogenic carbon since 1750 has led to
the ocean becoming more acidic with an average decrease in
pH of 0.1 units. Increasing atmospheric CO2
 concentrations
lead to further acidification. Projections based on SRES scenarios give a reduction in average global surface ocean pH of
between 0.14 and 0.35 units over the 21st century. While the effects of observed ocean acidification on the marine biosphere are
as yet undocumented, the progressive acidification of oceans is
expected to have negative impacts on marine shell-forming organisms (e.g. corals) and their dependent species. {3.3.4}
Altered frequencies and intensities of extreme weather,
together with sea level rise, are expected to have mostly
adverse effects on natural and human systems. {3.3.5}
Examples for selected extremes and sectors are shown in
Table SPM.3.
Anthropogenic warming and sea level rise would continue for centuries due to the time scales associated
with climate processes and feedbacks, even if GHG
concentrations were to be stabilised. {3.2.3}
Estimated long-term (multi-century) warming corresponding to the six AR4 Working Group III stabilisation categories
is shown in Figure SPM.8.
Contraction of the Greenland ice sheet is projected to continue to contribute to sea level rise after 2100. Current models
suggest virtually complete elimination of the Greenland ice
sheet and a resulting contribution to sea level rise of about 7m
if global average warming were sustained for millennia in
excess of 1.9 to 4.6°C relative to pre-industrial values. The
corresponding future temperatures in Greenland are comparable to those inferred for the last interglacial period 125,000
years ago, when palaeoclimatic information suggests reductions
of polar land ice extent and 4 to 6m of sea level rise. {3.2.3}
Current global model studies project that the Antarctic ice
sheet will remain too cold for widespread surface melting and
gain mass due to increased snowfall. However, net loss of ice
mass could occur if dynamical ice discharge dominates the
ice sheet mass balance. {3.2.3}
Anthropogenic warming could lead to some impacts
that are abrupt or irreversible, depending upon the rate
and magnitude of the climate change. {3.4}
Partial loss of ice sheets on polar land could imply metres
of sea level rise, major changes in coastlines and inundation
of low-lying areas, with greatest effects in river deltas and
low-lying islands. Such changes are projected to occur over
millennial time scales, but more rapid sea level rise on century time scales cannot be excluded. {3.4}
Climate change is likely to lead to some irreversible impacts. There is medium confidence that approximately 20 to
30% of species assessed so far are likely to be at increased
risk of extinction if increases in global average warming exceed 1.5 to 2.5°C (relative to 1980-1999). As global average
temperature increase exceeds about 3.5°C, model projections
suggest significant extinctions (40 to 70% of species assessed)
around the globe. {3.4}
Based on current model simulations, the meridional overturning circulation (MOC) of the Atlantic Ocean will very likely
slow down during the 21st century; nevertheless temperatures
over the Atlantic and Europe are projected to increase. The
MOC is very unlikely to undergo a large abrupt transition during the 21st century. Longer-term MOC changes cannot be assessed with confidence. Impacts of large-scale and persistent
changes in the MOC are likely to include changes in marine
ecosystem productivity, fisheries, ocean CO2
 uptake, oceanic
oxygen concentrations and terrestrial vegetation. Changes in
terrestrial and ocean CO2
 uptake may feed back on the climate system. {3.4}
 
 4. Adaptation and mitigation options14
A wide array of adaptation options is available, but more
extensive adaptation than is currently occurring is required to reduce vulnerability to climate change. There
are barriers, limits and costs, which are not fully understood. {4.2}
Societies have a long record of managing the impacts of
weather- and climate-related events. Nevertheless, additional
adaptation measures will be required to reduce the adverse
impacts of projected climate change and variability, regardless of the scale of mitigation undertaken over the next two to
three decades. Moreover, vulnerability to climate change can
be exacerbated by other stresses. These arise from, for example, current climate hazards, poverty and unequal access to
resources, food insecurity, trends in economic globalisation,
conflict and incidence of diseases such as HIV/AIDS. {4.2}
Some planned adaptation to climate change is already
occurring on a limited basis. Adaptation can reduce vulnerability, especially when it is embedded within broader sectoral
initiatives (Table SPM.4). There is high confidence that there
are viable adaptation options that can be implemented in some
sectors at low cost, and/or with high benefit-cost ratios. However, comprehensive estimates of global costs and benefits of
adaptation are limited. {4.2, Table 4.1}
Adaptive capacity is intimately connected to social and
economic development but is unevenly distributed
across and within societies. {4.2}
A range of barriers limits both the implementation and
effectiveness of adaptation measures. The capacity to adapt is
dynamic and is influenced by a society’s productive base, including natural and man-made capital assets, social networks
and entitlements, human capital and institutions, governance,
national income, health and technology. Even societies with
high adaptive capacity remain vulnerable to climate change,
variability and extremes. {4.2}
Both bottom-up and top-down studies indicate that
there is high agreement and much evidence of substantial economic potential for the mitigation of global
GHG emissions over the coming decades that could
offset the projected growth of global emissions or reduce emissions below current levels (Figures SPM.9,
SPM.10).15 While top-down and bottom-up studies are
in line at the global level (Figure SPM.9) there are considerable differences at the sectoral level. {4.3}
No single technology can provide all of the mitigation
potential in any sector. The economic mitigation potential,
which is generally greater than the market mitigation potential, can only be achieved when adequate policies are in place
and barriers removed (Table SPM.5). {4.3}
Bottom-up studies suggest that mitigation opportunities
with net negative costs have the potential to reduce emissions
by around 6 GtCO2
-eq/yr in 2030, realising which requires
dealing with implementation barriers. {4.3}
A wide variety of policies and instruments are available to governments to create the incentives for mitigation action. Their applicability depends on national
circumstances and sectoral context (Table SPM.5). {4.3}
They include integrating climate policies in wider development policies, regulations and standards, taxes and charges,
tradable permits, financial incentives, voluntary agreements,
information instruments, and research, development and demonstration (RD&D). {4.3}
An effective carbon-price signal could realise significant
mitigation potential in all sectors. Modelling studies show that
global carbon prices rising to US$20-80/tCO2
-eq by 2030 are
consistent with stabilisation at around 550ppm CO2
-eq by 2100.
For the same stabilisation level, induced technological change
may lower these price ranges to US$5-65/tCO2
-eq in 2030.17 {4.3}
There is high agreement and much evidence that mitigation actions can result in near-term co-benefits (e.g. improved
health due to reduced air pollution) that may offset a substantial fraction of mitigation costs. {4.3}
There is high agreement and medium evidence that Annex
I countries’ actions may affect the global economy and global
emissions, although the scale of carbon leakage remains uncertain.18 {4.3}
Fossil fuel exporting nations (in both Annex I and non-Annex I countries) may expect, as indicated in the TAR, lower demand and prices and lower GDP growth due to mitigation policies. The extent of this spillover depends strongly on assumptions related to policy decisions and oil market conditions. {4.3}
There is also high agreement and medium evidence that
changes in lifestyle, behaviour patterns and management practices can contribute to climate change mitigation across all sectors. {4.3}
Many options for reducing global GHG emissions
through international cooperation exist. There is high
agreement and much evidence that notable achievements of the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol are the
establishment of a global response to climate change,
stimulation of an array of national policies, and the creation of an international carbon market and new institutional mechanisms that may provide the foundation
for future mitigation efforts. Progress has also been made
in addressing adaptation within the UNFCCC and additional international initiatives have been suggested. {4.5}
Greater cooperative efforts and expansion of market mechanisms will help to reduce global costs for achieving a given level
of mitigation, or will improve environmental effectiveness. Efforts can include diverse elements such as emissions targets;
sectoral, local, sub-national and regional actions; RD&D
programmes; adopting common policies; implementing development-oriented actions; or expanding financing instruments. {4.5}
In several sectors, climate response options can be
implemented to realise synergies and avoid conflicts
with other dimensions of sustainable development.
Decisions about macroeconomic and other non-climate
policies can significantly affect emissions, adaptive
capacity and vulnerability. {4.4, 5.8}
Making development more sustainable can enhance mitigative and adaptive capacities, reduce emissions and reduce
vulnerability, but there may be barriers to implementation. On
the other hand, it is very likely that climate change can slow
the pace of progress towards sustainable development. Over
the next half-century, climate change could impede achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. {5.8}

5. The long-term perspective
Determining what constitutes “dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system” in relation
to Article 2 of the UNFCCC involves value judgements.
Science can support informed decisions on this issue,
including by providing criteria for judging which vulnerabilities might be labelled ‘key’. {Box ‘Key Vulnerabilities and Article 2 of the UNFCCC’, Topic 5}
Key vulnerabilities19 may be associated with many climate-sensitive systems, including food supply, infrastructure,
health, water resources, coastal systems, ecosystems, global
biogeochemical cycles, ice sheets and modes of oceanic and
atmospheric circulation. {Box ‘Key Vulnerabilities and Article 2 of
the UNFCCC’, Topic 5}The five ‘reasons for concern’ identified in the TAR remain a viable framework to consider key vulnerabilities. These ‘reasons’ are assessed here to be stronger
than in the TAR. Many risks are identified with higher confidence. Some risks are projected to be larger or to occur
at lower increases in temperature. Understanding about
the relationship between impacts (the basis for ‘reasons
for concern’ in the TAR) and vulnerability (that includes
the ability to adapt to impacts) has improved. {5.2}
This is due to more precise identification of the circumstances that make systems, sectors and regions especially vulnerable and growing evidence of the risks of very large impacts on multiple-century time scales. {5.2}
 Risks to unique and threatened systems. There is new
and stronger evidence of observed impacts of climate
change on unique and vulnerable systems (such as polar
and high mountain communities and ecosystems), with
increasing levels of adverse impacts as temperatures increase further. An increasing risk of species extinction and
coral reef damage is projected with higher confidence than
in the TAR as warming proceeds. There is medium confidence that approximately 20 to 30% of plant and animal
species assessed so far are likely to be at increased risk of
extinction if increases in global average temperature exceed 1.5 to 2.5°C over 1980-1999 levels. Confidence has
increased that a 1 to 2°C increase in global mean temperature above 1990 levels (about 1.5 to 2.5°C above preindustrial) poses significant risks to many unique and
threatened systems including many biodiversity hotspots.
Corals are vulnerable to thermal stress and have low adaptive capacity. Increases in sea surface temperature of about
1 to 3°C are projected to result in more frequent coral
bleaching events and widespread mortality, unless there
is thermal adaptation or acclimatisation by corals. Increasing
vulnerability of indigenous communities in the Arctic and
small island communities to warming is projected. {5.2}
 Risks of extreme weather events. Responses to some recent extreme events reveal higher levels of vulnerability
than the TAR. There is now higher confidence in the projected increases in droughts, heat waves and floods, as
well as their adverse impacts. {5.2}
 Distribution of impacts and vulnerabilities. There are
sharp differences across regions and those in the weakest
economic position are often the most vulnerable to climate change. There is increasing evidence of greater vulnerability of specific groups such as the poor and elderly
not only in developing but also in developed countries.
Moreover, there is increased evidence that low-latitude
and less developed areas generally face greater risk, for
example in dry areas and megadeltas. {5.2}
 Aggregate impacts. Compared to the TAR, initial net market-based benefits from climate change are projected to
peak at a lower magnitude of warming, while damages
would be higher for larger magnitudes of warming. The
net costs of impacts of increased warming are projected
to increase over time. {5.2}
 Risks of large-scale singularities. There is high confidence that global warming over many centuries would lead
to a sea level rise contribution from thermal expansion
alone that is projected to be much larger than observed
over the 20th century, with loss of coastal area and associated impacts. There is better understanding than in the TAR
that the risk of additional contributions to sea level rise
from both the Greenland and possibly Antarctic ice sheets
may be larger than projected by ice sheet models and could
occur on century time scales. This is because ice dynamical processes seen in recent observations but not fully included in ice sheet models assessed in the AR4 could increase the rate of ice loss. {5.2}
There is high confidence that neither adaptation nor
mitigation alone can avoid all climate change impacts;
however, they can complement each other and together
can significantly reduce the risks of climate change. {5.3}
Adaptation is necessary in the short and longer term to address impacts resulting from the warming that would occur even
for the lowest stabilisation scenarios assessed. There are barriers,
limits and costs, but these are not fully understood. Unmitigated
climate change would, in the long term, be likely to exceed the
capacity of natural, managed and human systems to adapt. The
time at which such limits could be reached will vary between
sectors and regions. Early mitigation actions would avoid further
locking in carbon intensive infrastructure and reduce climate
change and associated adaptation needs. {5.2, 5.3}
Many impacts can be reduced, delayed or avoided by
mitigation. Mitigation efforts and investments over the
next two to three decades will have a large impact on
opportunities to achieve lower stabilisation levels. Delayed emission reductions significantly constrain the
opportunities to achieve lower stabilisation levels and
increase the risk of more severe climate change impacts. {5.3, 5.4, 5.7}
In order to stabilise the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere, emissions would need to peak and decline thereafter. The lower the stabilisation level, the more quickly this
peak and decline would need to occur.20 {5.4}
Table SPM.6 and Figure SPM.11 summarise the required
emission levels for different groups of stabilisation concentrations and the resulting equilibrium global warming and long term sea level rise due to thermal expansion only.21 The timing and level of mitigation to reach a given temperature
stabilisation level is earlier and more stringent if climate sensitivity is high than if it is low. {5.4, 5.7}
Sea level rise under warming is inevitable. Thermal expansion would continue for many centuries after GHG concentrations have stabilised, for any of the stabilisation levels
assessed, causing an eventual sea level rise much larger than
projected for the 21st century. The eventual contributions from
Greenland ice sheet loss could be several metres, and larger
than from thermal expansion, should warming in excess of
1.9 to 4.6°C above pre-industrial be sustained over many centuries. The long time scales of thermal expansion and ice sheet
response to warming imply that stabilisation of GHG concentrations at or above present levels would not stabilise sea level
for many centuries. {5.3, 5.4}
There is high agreement and much evidence that
all stabilisation levels assessed can be achieved by
deployment of a portfolio of technologies that are either currently available or expected to be commercialised
in coming decades, assuming appropriate and effective incentives are in place for their development,
acquisition, deployment and diffusion and addressing
related barriers. {5.5}
All assessed stabilisation scenarios indicate that 60 to 80%
of the reductions would come from energy supply and use
and industrial processes, with energy efficiency playing a key
role in many scenarios. Including non-CO2
 and CO2
 land-use
and forestry mitigation options provides greater flexibility and
cost-effectiveness. Low stabilisation levels require early investments and substantially more rapid diffusion and
commercialisation of advanced low-emissions technologies. {5.5}
Without substantial investment flows and effective technology transfer, it may be difficult to achieve emission reduction at a significant scale. Mobilising financing of incremental costs of low-carbon technologies is important. {5.5}
The macro-economic costs of mitigation generally rise
with the stringency of the stabilisation target (Table
SPM.7). For specific countries and sectors, costs vary
considerably from the global average.22 {5.6}
In 2050, global average macro-economic costs for mitigation towards stabilisation between 710 and 445ppm CO2
-eq are
between a 1% gain and 5.5% decrease of global GDP (Table
SPM.7). This corresponds to slowing average annual global GDP
growth by less than 0.12 percentage points. {5.6}
Responding to climate change involves an iterative risk
management process that includes both adaptation and
mitigation and takes into account climate change damages, co-benefits, sustainability, equity and attitudes
to risk. {5.1}
Impacts of climate change are very likely to impose net
annual costs, which will increase over time as global temperatures increase. Peer-reviewed estimates of the social cost
of carbon23 in 2005 average US$12 per tonne of CO2
, but the
range from 100 estimates is large (-$3 to $95/tCO2
). This is
due in large part to differences in assumptions regarding climate sensitivity, response lags, the treatment of risk and equity, economic and non-economic impacts, the inclusion of
potentially catastrophic losses and discount rates. Aggregate
estimates of costs mask significant differences in impacts
across sectors, regions and populations and very likely underestimate damage costs because they cannot include many nonquantifiable impacts. {5.7}
Limited and early analytical results from integrated analyses of the costs and benefits of mitigation indicate that they
are broadly comparable in magnitude, but do not as yet permit
an unambiguous determination of an emissions pathway or
stabilisation level where benefits exceed costs. {5.7}
Climate sensitivity is a key uncertainty for mitigation scenarios for specific temperature levels. {5.4}
Choices about the scale and timing of GHG mitigation
involve balancing the economic costs of more rapid emission
reductions now against the corresponding medium-term and
long-term climate risks of delay. {5.7}


